DARKWATER

Voices from within the Veil

W.E.B. DU BOIS


POSTSCRIPT


These are the things of which men think, who live: of their own selves
and the dwelling place of their fathers; of their neighbors; of work and
service; of rule and reason and women and children; of Beauty and Death
and War. To this thinking I have only to add a point of view: I have
been in the world, but not of it. I have seen the human drama from a
veiled corner, where all the outer tragedy and comedy have reproduced
themselves in microcosm within. From this inner torment of souls the
human scene without has interpreted itself to me in unusual and even
illuminating ways. For this reason, and this alone, I venture to write
again on themes on which great souls have already said greater words, in
the hope that I may strike here and there a half-tone, newer even if
slighter, up from the heart of my problem and the problems of my people.

Between the sterner flights of logic, I have sought to set some little
alightings of what may be poetry. They are tributes to Beauty, unworthy
to stand alone; yet perversely, in my mind, now at the end, I know not
whether I mean the Thought for the Fancy--or the Fancy for the Thought,
or why the book trails off to playing, rather than standing strong on
unanswering fact. But this is alway--is it not?--the Riddle of Life.

Many of my words appear here transformed from other publications and I
thank the _Atlantic_, the _Independent_, the _Crisis_, and the _Journal
of Race Development_ for letting me use them again.

W.E. BURGHARDT DU BOIS.
New York, 1919.




Contents


CHAPTER                                      PAGE

      POSTSCRIPT                              ix
      _Credo_                                  1

I.    THE SHADOW OF YEARS                      3
      _A Litany at Atlanta_                   14

II.   THE SOULS OF WHITE FOLK                 17
      _The Riddle of the Sphinx_              30

III.  THE HANDS OF ETHIOPIA                   32
      _The Princess of the Hither Isles_      43

IV.   OF WORK AND WEALTH                      47
      _The Second Coming_                     60

V.    "THE SERVANT IN THE HOUSE"              63
      _Jesus Christ in Texas_                 70

VI.   OF THE RULING OF MEN                    78
      _The Call_                              93

VII.  THE DAMNATION OF WOMEN                  95
      _Children of the Moon_                 109

VIII. THE IMMORTAL CHILD                     114
      _Almighty Death_                       128

IX.   OF BEAUTY AND DEATH                    130
      _The Prayers of God_                   145

X.    THE COMET                              149
      _A Hymn to the Peoples_                161








_Credo_


I believe in God, who made of one blood all nations that on earth do
dwell. I believe that all men, black and brown and white, are brothers,
varying through time and opportunity, in form and gift and feature, but
differing in no essential particular, and alike in soul and the
possibility of infinite development.

Especially do I believe in the Negro Race: in the beauty of its genius,
the sweetness of its soul, and its strength in that meekness which shall
yet inherit this turbulent earth.

I believe in Pride of race and lineage and self: in pride of self so
deep as to scorn injustice to other selves; in pride of lineage so great
as to despise no man's father; in pride of race so chivalrous as neither
to offer bastardy to the weak nor beg wedlock of the strong, knowing
that men may be brothers in Christ, even though they be not
brothers-in-law.

I believe in Service--humble, reverent service, from the blackening of
boots to the whitening of souls; for Work is Heaven, Idleness Hell, and
Wage is the "Well done!" of the Master, who summoned all them that labor
and are heavy laden, making no distinction between the black, sweating
cotton hands of Georgia and the first families of Virginia, since all
distinction not based on deed is devilish and not divine.

I believe in the Devil and his angels, who wantonly work to narrow the
opportunity of struggling human beings, especially if they be black; who
spit in the faces of the fallen, strike them that cannot strike again,
believe the worst and work to prove it, hating the image which their
Maker stamped on a brother's soul.

I believe in the Prince of Peace. I believe that War is Murder. I
believe that armies and navies are at bottom the tinsel and braggadocio
of oppression and wrong, and I believe that the wicked conquest of
weaker and darker nations by nations whiter and stronger but foreshadows
the death of that strength.

I believe in Liberty for all men: the space to stretch their arms and
their souls, the right to breathe and the right to vote, the freedom to
choose their friends, enjoy the sunshine, and ride on the railroads,
uncursed by color; thinking, dreaming, working as they will in a kingdom
of beauty and love.

I believe in the Training of Children, black even as white; the leading
out of little souls into the green pastures and beside the still waters,
not for pelf or peace, but for life lit by some large vision of beauty
and goodness and truth; lest we forget, and the sons of the fathers,
like Esau, for mere meat barter their birthright in a mighty nation.

Finally, I believe in Patience--patience with the weakness of the Weak
and the strength of the Strong, the prejudice of the Ignorant and the
ignorance of the Blind; patience with the tardy triumph of Joy and the
mad chastening of Sorrow.




I

THE SHADOW OF YEARS


I was born by a golden river and in the shadow of two great hills, five
years after the Emancipation Proclamation. The house was quaint, with
clapboards running up and down, neatly trimmed, and there were five
rooms, a tiny porch, a rosy front yard, and unbelievably delicious
strawberries in the rear. A South Carolinian, lately come to the
Berkshire Hills, owned all this--tall, thin, and black, with golden
earrings, and given to religious trances. We were his transient tenants
for the time.

My own people were part of a great clan. Fully two hundred years before,
Tom Burghardt had come through the western pass from the Hudson with his
Dutch captor, "Coenraet Burghardt," sullen in his slavery and achieving
his freedom by volunteering for the Revolution at a time of sudden
alarm. His wife was a little, black, Bantu woman, who never became
reconciled to this strange land; she clasped her knees and rocked and
crooned:

    "Do bana coba--gene me, gene me!
    Ben d'nuli, ben d'le--"

Tom died about 1787, but of him came many sons, and one, Jack, who
helped in the War of 1812. Of Jack and his wife, Violet, was born a
mighty family, splendidly named: Harlow and Ira, CloÃ«, Lucinda, Maria,
and Othello! I dimly remember my grandfather, Othello,--or "Uncle
Tallow,"--a brown man, strong-voiced and redolent with tobacco, who sat
stiffly in a great high chair because his hip was broken. He was
probably a bit lazy and given to wassail. At any rate, grandmother had a
shrewish tongue and often berated him. This grandmother was Sarah--"Aunt
Sally"--a stern, tall, Dutch-African woman, beak-nosed, but
beautiful-eyed and golden-skinned. Ten or more children were theirs, of
whom the youngest was Mary, my mother.

Mother was dark shining bronze, with a tiny ripple in her black hair,
black-eyed, with a heavy, kind face. She gave one the impression of
infinite patience, but a curious determination was concealed in her
softness. The family were small farmers on Egremont Plain, between Great
Barrington and Sheffield, Massachusetts. The bits of land were too small
to support the great families born on them and we were always poor. I
never remember being cold or hungry, but I do remember that shoes and
coal, and sometimes flour, caused mother moments of anxious thought in
winter, and a new suit was an event!

At about the time of my birth economic pressure was transmuting the
family generally from farmers to "hired" help. Some revolted and
migrated westward, others went cityward as cooks and barbers. Mother
worked for some years at house service in Great Barrington, and after a
disappointed love episode with a cousin, who went to California, she met
and married Alfred Du Bois and went to town to live by the golden river
where I was born.

Alfred, my father, must have seemed a splendid vision in that little
valley under the shelter of those mighty hills. He was small and
beautiful of face and feature, just tinted with the sun, his curly hair
chiefly revealing his kinship to Africa. In nature he was a
dreamer,--romantic, indolent, kind, unreliable. He had in him the making
of a poet, an adventurer, or a Beloved Vagabond, according to the life
that closed round him; and that life gave him all too little. His
father, Alexander Du Bois, cloaked under a stern, austere demeanor a
passionate revolt against the world. He, too, was small, but squarish. I
remember him as I saw him first, in his home in New Bedford,--white hair
close-cropped; a seamed, hard face, but high in tone, with a gray eye
that could twinkle or glare.

Long years before him Louis XIV drove two Huguenots, Jacques and Louis
Du Bois, into wild Ulster County, New York. One of them in the third or
fourth generation had a descendant, Dr. James Du Bois, a gay, rich
bachelor, who made his money in the Bahamas, where he and the Gilberts
had plantations. There he took a beautiful little mulatto slave as his
mistress, and two sons were born: Alexander in 1803 and John, later.
They were fine, straight, clear-eyed boys, white enough to "pass." He
brought them to America and put Alexander in the celebrated Cheshire
School, in Connecticut. Here he often visited him, but one last time,
fell dead. He left no will, and his relations made short shrift of these
sons. They gathered in the property, apprenticed grandfather to a
shoemaker; then dropped him.

Grandfather took his bitter dose like a thoroughbred. Wild as was his
inner revolt against this treatment, he uttered no word against the
thieves and made no plea. He tried his fortunes here and in Haiti,
where, during his short, restless sojourn, my own father was born.
Eventually, grandfather became chief steward on the passenger boat
between New York and New Haven; later he was a small merchant in
Springfield; and finally he retired and ended his days at New Bedford.
Always he held his head high, took no insults, made few friends. He was
not a "Negro"; he was a man! Yet the current was too strong even for
him. Then even more than now a colored man had colored friends or none
at all, lived in a colored world or lived alone. A few fine, strong,
black men gained the heart of this silent, bitter man in New York and
New Haven. If he had scant sympathy with their social clannishness, he
was with them in fighting discrimination. So, when the white
Episcopalians of Trinity Parish, New Haven, showed plainly that they no
longer wanted black Folks as fellow Christians, he led the revolt which
resulted in St. Luke's Parish, and was for years its senior warden. He
lies dead in the Grove Street Cemetery, beside Jehudi Ashmun.

Beneath his sternness was a very human man. Slyly he wrote
poetry,--stilted, pleading things from a soul astray. He loved women in
his masterful way, marrying three beautiful wives in succession and
clinging to each with a certain desperate, even if unsympathetic,
affection. As a father he was, naturally, a failure,--hard, domineering,
unyielding. His four children reacted characteristically: one was until
past middle life a thin spinster, the mental image of her father; one
died; one passed over into the white world and her children's children
are now white, with no knowledge of their Negro blood; the fourth, my
father, bent before grandfather, but did not break--better if he had. He
yielded and flared back, asked forgiveness and forgot why, became the
harshly-held favorite, who ran away and rioted and roamed and loved and
married my brown mother.

So with some circumstance having finally gotten myself born, with a
flood of Negro blood, a strain of French, a bit of Dutch, but, thank
God! no "Anglo-Saxon," I come to the days of my childhood.

They were very happy. Early we moved back to Grandfather Burghardt's
home,--I barely remember its stone fireplace, big kitchen, and
delightful woodshed. Then this house passed to other branches of the
clan and we moved to rented quarters in town,--to one delectable place
"upstairs," with a wide yard full of shrubbery, and a brook; to another
house abutting a railroad, with infinite interests and astonishing
playmates; and finally back to the quiet street on which I was
born,--down a long lane and in a homely, cozy cottage, with a
living-room, a tiny sitting-room, a pantry, and two attic bedrooms. Here
mother and I lived until she died, in 1884, for father early began his
restless wanderings. I last remember urgent letters for us to come to
New Milford, where he had started a barber shop. Later he became a
preacher. But mother no longer trusted his dreams, and he soon faded out
of our lives into silence.

From the age of five until I was sixteen I went to a school on the same
grounds,--down a lane, into a widened yard, with a big choke-cherry tree
and two buildings, wood and brick. Here I got acquainted with my world,
and soon had my criterions of judgment.

Wealth had no particular lure. On the other hand, the shadow of wealth
was about us. That river of my birth was golden because of the woolen
and paper waste that soiled it. The gold was theirs, not ours; but the
gleam and glint was for all. To me it was all in order and I took it
philosophically. I cordially despised the poor Irish and South Germans,
who slaved in the mills, and annexed the rich and well-to-do as my
natural companions. Of such is the kingdom of snobs!

Most of our townfolk were, naturally, the well-to-do, shading downward,
but seldom reaching poverty. As playmate of the children I saw the homes
of nearly every one, except a few immigrant New Yorkers, of whom none of
us approved. The homes I saw impressed me, but did not overwhelm me.
Many were bigger than mine, with newer and shinier things, but they did
not seem to differ in kind. I think I probably surprised my hosts more
than they me, for I was easily at home and perfectly happy and they
looked to me just like ordinary people, while my brown face and frizzled
hair must have seemed strange to them.

Yet I was very much one of them. I was a center and sometimes the leader
of the town gang of boys. We were noisy, but never very bad,--and,
indeed, my mother's quiet influence came in here, as I realize now. She
did not try to make me perfect. To her I was already perfect. She simply
warned me of a few things, especially saloons. In my town the saloon was
the open door to hell. The best families had their drunkards and the
worst had little else.

Very gradually,--I cannot now distinguish the steps, though here and
there I remember a jump or a jolt--but very gradually I found myself
assuming quite placidly that I was different from other children. At
first I think I connected the difference with a manifest ability to get
my lessons rather better than most and to recite with a certain happy,
almost taunting, glibness, which brought frowns here and there. Then,
slowly, I realized that some folks, a few, even several, actually
considered my brown skin a misfortune; once or twice I became painfully
aware that some human beings even thought it a crime. I was not for a
moment daunted,--although, of course, there were some days of secret
tears--rather I was spurred to tireless effort. If they beat me at
anything, I was grimly determined to make them sweat for it! Once I
remember challenging a great, hard farmer-boy to battle, when I knew he
could whip me; and he did. But ever after, he was polite.

As time flew I felt not so much disowned and rejected as rather drawn up
into higher spaces and made part of a mightier mission. At times I
almost pitied my pale companions, who were not of the Lord's anointed
and who saw in their dreams no splendid quests of golden fleeces.

Even in the matter of girls my peculiar phantasy asserted itself.
Naturally, it was in our town voted bad form for boys of twelve and
fourteen to show any evident weakness for girls. We tolerated them
loftily, and now and then they played in our games, when I joined in
quite as naturally as the rest. It was when strangers came, or summer
boarders, or when the oldest girls grew up that my sharp senses noted
little hesitancies in public and searchings for possible public opinion.
Then I flamed! I lifted my chin and strode off to the mountains, where I
viewed the world at my feet and strained my eyes across the shadow of
the hills.

I was graduated from high school at sixteen, and I talked of "Wendell
Phillips." This was my first sweet taste of the world's applause. There
were flowers and upturned faces, music and marching, and there was my
mother's smile. She was lame, then, and a bit drawn, but very happy. It
was her great day and that very year she lay down with a sigh of content
and has not yet awakened. I felt a certain gladness to see her, at last,
at peace, for she had worried all her life. Of my own loss I had then
little realization. That came only with the after-years. Now it was the
choking gladness and solemn feel of wings! At last, I was going beyond
the hills and into the world that beckoned steadily.

There came a little pause,--a singular pause. I was given to understand
that I was almost too young for the world. Harvard was the goal of my
dreams, but my white friends hesitated and my colored friends were
silent. Harvard was a mighty conjure-word in that hill town, and even
the mill owners' sons had aimed lower. Finally it was tactfully
explained that the place for me was in the South among my people. A
scholarship had been already arranged at Fisk, and my summer earnings
would pay the fare. My relatives grumbled, but after a twinge I felt a
strange delight! I forgot, or did not thoroughly realize, the curious
irony by which I was not looked upon as a real citizen of my birth-town,
with a future and a career, and instead was being sent to a far land
among strangers who were regarded as (and in truth were) "mine own
people."

Ah! the wonder of that journey, with its faint spice of adventure, as I
entered the land of slaves; the never-to-be-forgotten marvel of that
first supper at Fisk with the world "colored" and opposite two of the
most beautiful beings God ever revealed to the eyes of seventeen. I
promptly lost my appetite, but I was deliriously happy!

As I peer back through the shadow of my years, seeing not too clearly,
but through the thickening veil of wish and after-thought, I seem to
view my life divided into four distinct parts: the Age of Miracles, the
Days of Disillusion, the Discipline of Work and Play, and the Second
Miracle Age.

The Age of Miracles began with Fisk and ended with Germany. I was
bursting with the joy of living. I seemed to ride in conquering might. I
was captain of my soul and master of fate! I _willed_ to do! It was
done. I _wished!_ The wish came true.

Now and then out of the void flashed the great sword of hate to remind
me of the battle. I remember once, in Nashville, brushing by accident
against a white woman on the street. Politely and eagerly I raised my
hat to apologize. That was thirty-five years ago. From that day to this
I have never knowingly raised my hat to a Southern white woman.

I suspect that beneath all of my seeming triumphs there were many
failures and disappointments, but the realities loomed so large that
they swept away even the memory of other dreams and wishes. Consider,
for a moment, how miraculous it all was to a boy of seventeen, just
escaped from a narrow valley: I willed and lo! my people came dancing
about me,--riotous in color, gay in laughter, full of sympathy, need,
and pleading; darkly delicious girls--"colored" girls--sat beside me and
actually talked to me while I gazed in tongue-tied silence or babbled in
boastful dreams. Boys with my own experiences and out of my own world,
who knew and understood, wrought out with me great remedies. I studied
eagerly under teachers who bent in subtle sympathy, feeling themselves
some shadow of the Veil and lifting it gently that we darker souls might
peer through to other worlds.

I willed and lo! I was walking beneath the elms of Harvard,--the name of
allurement, the college of my youngest, wildest visions! I needed money;
scholarships and prizes fell into my lap,--not all I wanted or strove
for, but all I needed to keep in school. Commencement came and standing
before governor, president, and grave, gowned men, I told them certain
astonishing truths, waving my arms and breathing fast! They applauded
with what now seems to me uncalled-for fervor, but then! I walked home
on pink clouds of glory! I asked for a fellowship and got it. I
announced my plan of studying in Germany, but Harvard had no more
fellowships for me. A friend, however, told me of the Slater Fund and
how the Board was looking for colored men worth educating. No thought of
modest hesitation occurred to me. I rushed at the chance.

The trustees of the Slater Fund excused themselves politely. They
acknowledged that they had in the past looked for colored boys of
ability to educate, but, being unsuccessful, they had stopped searching.
I went at them hammer and tongs! I plied them with testimonials and
mid-year and final marks. I intimated plainly, impudently, that they
were "stalling"! In vain did the chairman, Ex-President Hayes, explain
and excuse. I took no excuses and brushed explanations aside. I wonder
now that he did not brush me aside, too, as a conceited meddler, but
instead he smiled and surrendered.

I crossed the ocean in a trance. Always I seemed to be saying, "It is
not real; I must be dreaming!" I can live it again--the little, Dutch
ship--the blue waters--the smell of new-mown hay--Holland and the Rhine.
I saw the Wartburg and Berlin; I made the Harzreise and climbed the
Brocken; I saw the Hansa towns and the cities and dorfs of South
Germany; I saw the Alps at Berne, the Cathedral at Milan, Florence,
Rome, Venice, Vienna, and Pesth; I looked on the boundaries of Russia;
and I sat in Paris and London.

On mountain and valley, in home and school, I met men and women as I had
never met them before. Slowly they became, not white folks, but folks.
The unity beneath all life clutched me. I was not less fanatically a
Negro, but "Negro" meant a greater, broader sense of humanity and
world-fellowship. I felt myself standing, not against the world, but
simply against American narrowness and color prejudice, with the
greater, finer world at my back urging me on.

I builded great castles in Spain and lived therein. I dreamed and loved
and wandered and sang; then, after two long years, I dropped suddenly
back into "nigger"-hating America!

My Days of Disillusion were not disappointing enough to discourage me. I
was still upheld by that fund of infinite faith, although dimly about me
I saw the shadow of disaster. I began to realize how much of what I had
called Will and Ability was sheer Luck! _Suppose_ my good mother had
preferred a steady income from my child labor rather than bank on the
precarious dividend of my higher training? _Suppose_ that pompous old
village judge, whose dignity we often ruffled and whose apples we stole,
had had his way and sent me while a child to a "reform" school to learn
a "trade"? _Suppose_ Principal Hosmer had been born with no faith in
"darkies," and instead of giving me Greek and Latin had taught me
carpentry and the making of tin pans? _Suppose_ I had missed a Harvard
scholarship? _Suppose_ the Slater Board had then, as now, distinct ideas
as to where the education of Negroes should stop? Suppose _and_ suppose!
As I sat down calmly on flat earth and looked at my life a certain great
fear seized me. Was I the masterful captain or the pawn of laughing
sprites? Who was I to fight a world of color prejudice? I raise my hat
to myself when I remember that, even with these thoughts, I did not
hesitate or waver; but just went doggedly to work, and therein lay
whatever salvation I have achieved.

First came the task of earning a living. I was not nice or hard to
please. I just got down on my knees and begged for work, anything and
anywhere. I wrote to Hampton, Tuskegee, and a dozen other places. They
politely declined, with many regrets. The trustees of a backwoods
Tennessee town considered me, but were eventually afraid. Then,
suddenly, Wilberforce offered to let me teach Latin and Greek at $750 a
year. I was overjoyed!

I did not know anything about Latin and Greek, but I did know of
Wilberforce. The breath of that great name had swept the water and
dropped into southern Ohio, where Southerners had taken their cure at
Tawawa Springs and where white Methodists had planted a school; then
came the little bishop, Daniel Payne, who made it a school of the
African Methodists. This was the school that called me, and when
re-considered offers from Tuskegee and Jefferson City followed, I
refused; I was so thankful for that first offer.

I went to Wilberforce with high ideals. I wanted to help to build a
great university. I was willing to work night as well as day. I taught
Latin, Greek, English, and German. I helped in the discipline, took part
in the social life, begged to be allowed to lecture on sociology, and
began to write books. But I found myself against a stone wall. Nothing
stirred before my impatient pounding! Or if it stirred, it soon slept
again.

Of course, I was too impatient! The snarl of years was not to be undone
in days. I set at solving the problem before I knew it. Wilberforce was
a colored church-school. In it were mingled the problems of
poorly-prepared pupils, an inadequately-equipped plant, the natural
politics of bishoprics, and the provincial reactions of a country town
loaded with traditions. It was my first introduction to a Negro world,
and I was at once marvelously inspired and deeply depressed. I was
inspired with the children,--had I not rubbed against the children of
the world and did I not find here the same eagerness, the same joy of
life, the same brains as in New England, France, and Germany? But, on
the other hand, the ropes and myths and knots and hindrances; the
thundering waves of the white world beyond beating us back; the scalding
breakers of this inner world,--its currents and back eddies--its
meanness and smallness--its sorrow and tragedy--its screaming farce!

In all this I was as one bound hand and foot. Struggle, work, fight as I
would, I seemed to get nowhere and accomplish nothing. I had all the
wild intolerance of youth, and no experience in human tangles. For the
first time in my life I realized that there were limits to my will to
do. The Day of Miracles was past, and a long, gray road of dogged work
lay ahead.

I had, naturally, my triumphs here and there. I defied the bishops in
the matter of public extemporaneous prayer and they yielded. I bearded
the poor, hunted president in his den, and yet was re-elected to my
position. I was slowly winning a way, but quickly losing faith in the
value of the way won. Was this the place to begin my life work? Was this
the work which I was best fitted to do? What business had I, anyhow, to
teach Greek when I had studied men? I grew sure that I had made a
mistake. So I determined to leave Wilberforce and try elsewhere. Thus,
the third period of my life began.

First, in 1896, I married--a slip of a girl, beautifully dark-eyed
and thorough and good as a German housewife. Then I accepted a job to
make a study of Negroes in Philadelphia for the University of
Pennsylvania,--one year at six hundred dollars. How did I dare these
two things? I do not know. Yet they spelled salvation. To remain at
Wilberforce without doing my ideals meant spiritual death. Both my
wife and I were homeless. I dared a home and a temporary job. But it
was a different daring from the days of my first youth. I was ready
to admit that the best of men might fail. I meant still to be captain
of my soul, but I realized that even captains are not omnipotent in
uncharted and angry seas.

I essayed a thorough piece of work in Philadelphia. I labored morning,
noon, and night. Nobody ever reads that fat volume on "The Philadelphia
Negro," but they treat it with respect, and that consoles me. The
colored people of Philadelphia received me with no open arms. They had a
natural dislike to being studied like a strange species. I met again and
in different guise those curious cross-currents and inner social
whirlings of my own people. They set me to groping. I concluded that I
did not know so much as I might about my own people, and when President
Bumstead invited me to Atlanta University the next year to teach
sociology and study the American Negro, I accepted gladly, at a salary
of twelve hundred dollars.

My real life work was done at Atlanta for thirteen years, from my
twenty-ninth to my forty-second birthday. They were years of great
spiritual upturning, of the making and unmaking of ideals, of hard work
and hard play. Here I found myself. I lost most of my mannerisms. I grew
more broadly human, made my closest and most holy friendships, and
studied human beings. I became widely-acquainted with the real condition
of my people. I realized the terrific odds which faced them. At
Wilberforce I was their captious critic. In Philadelphia I was their
cold and scientific investigator, with microscope and probe. It took but
a few years of Atlanta to bring me to hot and indignant defense. I saw
the race-hatred of the whites as I had never dreamed of it
before,--naked and unashamed! The faint discrimination of my hopes and
intangible dislikes paled into nothing before this great, red monster
of cruel oppression. I held back with more difficulty each day my
mounting indignation against injustice and misrepresentation.

With all this came the strengthening and hardening of my own character.
The billows of birth, love, and death swept over me. I saw life through
all its paradox and contradiction of streaming eyes and mad merriment. I
emerged into full manhood, with the ruins of some ideals about me, but
with others planted above the stars; scarred and a bit grim, but hugging
to my soul the divine gift of laughter and withal determined, even unto
stubbornness, to fight the good fight.

At last, forbear and waver as I would, I faced the great Decision. My
life's last and greatest door stood ajar. What with all my dreaming,
studying, and teaching was I going to _do_ in this fierce fight? Despite
all my youthful conceit and bumptiousness, I found developed beneath it
all a reticence and new fear of forwardness, which sprang from searching
criticisms of motive and high ideals of efficiency; but contrary to my
dream of racial solidarity and notwithstanding my deep desire to serve
and follow and think, rather than to lead and inspire and decide, I
found myself suddenly the leader of a great wing of people fighting
against another and greater wing.

Nor could any effort of mine keep this fight from sinking to the
personal plane. Heaven knows I tried. That first meeting of a knot of
enthusiasts, at Niagara Falls, had all the earnestness of self-devotion.
At the second meeting, at Harper's Ferry, it arose to the solemnity of a
holy crusade and yet without and to the cold, hard stare of the world it
seemed merely the envy of fools against a great man, Booker Washington.

Of the movement I was willy-nilly leader. I hated the role. For the
first time I faced criticism and _cared_. Every ideal and habit of my
life was cruelly misjudged. I who had always overstriven to give credit
for good work, who had never consciously stooped to envy was accused by
honest colored people of every sort of small and petty jealousy, while
white people said I was ashamed of my race and wanted to be white! And
this of me, whose one life fanaticism had been belief in my Negro blood!

Away back in the little years of my boyhood I had sold the Springfield
_Republican_ and written for Mr. Fortune's _Globe_. I dreamed of being
an editor myself some day. I am an editor. In the great, slashing days
of college life I dreamed of a strong organization to fight the battles
of the Negro race. The National Association for the Advancement of
Colored People is such a body, and it grows daily. In the dark days at
Wilberforce I planned a time when I could speak freely to my people and
of them, interpreting between two worlds. I am speaking now. In the
study at Atlanta I grew to fear lest my radical beliefs should so hurt
the college that either my silence or the institution's ruin would
result. Powers and principalities have not yet curbed my tongue and
Atlanta still lives.

It all came--this new Age of Miracles--because a few persons in 1909
determined to celebrate Lincoln's Birthday properly by calling for the
final emancipation of the American Negro. I came at their call. My
salary even for a year was not assured, but it was the "Voice without
reply." The result has been the National Association for the Advancement
of Colored People and _The Crisis_ and this book, which I am finishing
on my Fiftieth Birthday.

Last year I looked death in the face and found its lineaments not
unkind. But it was not my time. Yet in nature some time soon and in the
fullness of days I shall die, quietly, I trust, with my face turned
South and eastward; and, dreaming or dreamless, I shall, I am sure,
enjoy death as I have enjoyed life.





_A Litany at Atlanta_

O Silent God, Thou whose voice afar in mist and mystery hath left our
ears an-hungered in these fearful days--

_Hear us, good Lord!_

Listen to us, Thy children: our faces dark with doubt are made a mockery
in Thy Sanctuary. With uplifted hands we front Thy Heaven, O God,
crying:

_We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord!_

We are not better than our fellows, Lord; we are but weak and human men.
When our devils do deviltry, curse Thou the doer and the deed,--curse
them as we curse them, do to them all and more than ever they have done
to innocence and weakness, to womanhood and home.

_Have mercy upon us, miserable sinners!_

And yet, whose is the deeper guilt? Who made these devils? Who nursed
them in crime and fed them on injustice? Who ravished and debauched
their mothers and their grandmothers? Who bought and sold their crime
and waxed fat and rich on public iniquity?

_Thou knowest, good God!_

Is this Thy Justice, O Father, that guile be easier than innocence and
the innocent be crucified for the guilt of the untouched guilty?

_Justice, O Judge of men!_

Wherefore do we pray? Is not the God of the Fathers dead? Have not seers
seen in Heaven's halls Thine hearsed and lifeless form stark amidst the
black and rolling smoke of sin, where all along bow bitter forms of
endless dead?

_Awake, Thou that sleepest!_

Thou art not dead, but flown afar, up hills of endless light, through
blazing corridors of suns, where worlds do swing of good and gentle men,
of women strong and free--far from the cozenage, black hypocrisy, and
chaste prostitution of this shameful speck of dust!

_Turn again, O Lord; leave us not to perish in our sin!_

From lust of body and lust of blood,--

_Great God, deliver us!_

From lust of power and lust of gold,--

_Great God, deliver us!_

From the leagued lying of despot and of brute,--

_Great God, deliver us!_

A city lay in travail, God our Lord, and from her loins sprang twin
Murder and Black Hate. Red was the midnight; clang, crack, and cry of
death and fury filled the air and trembled underneath the stars where
church spires pointed silently to Thee. And all this was to sate the
greed of greedy men who hide behind the veil of vengeance!

_Bend us Thine ear, O Lord!_

In the pale, still morning we looked upon the deed. We stopped our ears
and held our leaping hands, but they--did they not wag their heads and
leer and cry with bloody jaws: _Cease from Crime!_ The word was mockery,
for thus they train a hundred crimes while we do cure one.

_Turn again our captivity, O Lord!_

Behold this maimed and broken thing, dear God; it was an humble black
man, who toiled and sweat to save a bit from the pittance paid him. They
told him: _Work and Rise!_ He worked. Did this man sin? Nay, but someone
told how someone said another did--one whom he had never seen nor known.
Yet for that man's crime this man lieth maimed and murdered, his wife
naked to shame, his children to poverty and evil.

_Hear us, O heavenly Father!_

Doth not this justice of hell stink in Thy nostrils, O God? How long
shall the mounting flood of innocent blood roar in Thine ears and pound
in our hearts for vengeance? Pile the pale frenzy of blood-crazed
brutes, who do such deeds, high on Thine Altar, Jehovah Jireh, and burn
it in hell forever and forever!

_Forgive us, good Lord; we know not what we say!_

Bewildered we are and passion-tossed, mad with the madness of a mobbed
and mocked and murdered people; straining at the armposts of Thy throne,
we raise our shackled hands and charge Thee, God, by the bones of our
stolen fathers, by the tears of our dead mothers, by the very blood of
Thy crucified Christ: What meaneth this? Tell us the plan; give us the
sign!

_Keep not Thou silent, O God!_

Sit not longer blind, Lord God, deaf to our prayer and dumb to our dumb
suffering. Surely Thou, too, art not white, O Lord, a pale, bloodless,
heartless thing!

_Ah! Christ of all the Pities!_

Forgive the thought! Forgive these wild, blasphemous words! Thou art
still the God of our black fathers and in Thy Soul's Soul sit some soft
darkenings of the evening, some shadowings of the velvet night.

But whisper--speak--call, great God, for Thy silence is white terror to
our hearts! The way, O God, show us the way and point us the path!

Whither? North is greed and South is blood; within, the coward, and
without, the liar. Whither? To death?

_Amen! Welcome, dark sleep!_

Whither? To life? But not this life, dear God, not this. Let the cup
pass from us, tempt us not beyond our strength, for there is that
clamoring and clawing within, to whose voice we would not listen, yet
shudder lest we must,--and it is red. Ah! God! It is a red and awful
shape.

_Selah!_

In yonder East trembles a star.

_Vengeance is Mine; I will repay, saith the Lord!_

Thy Will, O Lord, be done!

_Kyrie Eleison!_

Lord, we have done these pleading, wavering words.

_We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord!_

We bow our heads and hearken soft to the sobbing of women and little
children.

_We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord!_

Our voices sink in silence and in night.

_Hear us, good Lord!_

In night, O God of a godless land!

_Amen!_

In silence, O Silent God.

_Selah!_





II

THE SOULS OF WHITE FOLK


High in the tower, where I sit above the loud complaining of the human
sea, I know many souls that toss and whirl and pass, but none there are
that intrigue me more than the Souls of White Folk.

Of them I am singularly clairvoyant. I see in and through them. I view
them from unusual points of vantage. Not as a foreigner do I come, for I
am native, not foreign, bone of their thought and flesh of their
language. Mine is not the knowledge of the traveler or the colonial
composite of dear memories, words and wonder. Nor yet is my knowledge
that which servants have of masters, or mass of class, or capitalist of
artisan. Rather I see these souls undressed and from the back and side.
I see the working of their entrails. I know their thoughts and they know
that I know. This knowledge makes them now embarrassed, now furious.
They deny my right to live and be and call me misbirth! My word is to
them mere bitterness and my soul, pessimism. And yet as they preach and
strut and shout and threaten, crouching as they clutch at rags of facts
and fancies to hide their nakedness, they go twisting, flying by my
tired eyes and I see them ever stripped,--ugly, human.

The discovery of personal whiteness among the world's peoples is a very
modern thing,--a nineteenth and twentieth century matter, indeed. The
ancient world would have laughed at such a distinction. The Middle Age
regarded skin color with mild curiosity; and even up into the eighteenth
century we were hammering our national manikins into one, great,
Universal Man, with fine frenzy which ignored color and race even more
than birth. Today we have changed all that, and the world in a sudden,
emotional conversion has discovered that it is white and by that token,
wonderful!

This assumption that of all the hues of God whiteness alone is
inherently and obviously better than brownness or tan leads to curious
acts; even the sweeter souls of the dominant world as they discourse
with me on weather, weal, and woe are continually playing above their
actual words an obligato of tune and tone, saying:

"My poor, un-white thing! Weep not nor rage. I know, too well, that the
curse of God lies heavy on you. Why? That is not for me to say, but be
brave! Do your work in your lowly sphere, praying the good Lord that
into heaven above, where all is love, you may, one day, be born--white!"

I do not laugh. I am quite straight-faced as I ask soberly:

"But what on earth is whiteness that one should so desire it?" Then
always, somehow, some way, silently but clearly, I am given to
understand that whiteness is the ownership of the earth forever and
ever, Amen!

Now what is the effect on a man or a nation when it comes passionately
to believe such an extraordinary dictum as this? That nations are coming
to believe it is manifest daily. Wave on wave, each with increasing
virulence, is dashing this new religion of whiteness on the shores of
our time. Its first effects are funny: the strut of the Southerner, the
arrogance of the Englishman amuck, the whoop of the hoodlum who
vicariously leads your mob. Next it appears dampening generous
enthusiasm in what we once counted glorious; to free the slave is
discovered to be tolerable only in so far as it freed his master! Do we
sense somnolent writhings in black Africa or angry groans in India or
triumphant banzais in Japan? "To your tents, O Israel!" These nations
are not white!

After the more comic manifestations and the chilling of generous
enthusiasm come subtler, darker deeds. Everything considered, the title
to the universe claimed by White Folk is faulty. It ought, at least, to
look plausible. How easy, then, by emphasis and omission to make
children believe that every great soul the world ever saw was a white
man's soul; that every great thought the world ever knew was a white
man's thought; that every great deed the world ever did was a white
man's deed; that every great dream the world ever sang was a white man's
dream. In fine, that if from the world were dropped everything that
could not fairly be attributed to White Folk, the world would, if
anything, be even greater, truer, better than now. And if all this be a
lie, is it not a lie in a great cause?

Here it is that the comedy verges to tragedy. The first minor note is
struck, all unconsciously, by those worthy souls in whom consciousness
of high descent brings burning desire to spread the gift abroad,--the
obligation of nobility to the ignoble. Such sense of duty assumes two
things: a real possession of the heritage and its frank appreciation by
the humble-born. So long, then, as humble black folk, voluble with
thanks, receive barrels of old clothes from lordly and generous whites,
there is much mental peace and moral satisfaction. But when the black
man begins to dispute the white man's title to certain alleged bequests
of the Fathers in wage and position, authority and training; and when
his attitude toward charity is sullen anger rather than humble jollity;
when he insists on his human right to swagger and swear and waste,--then
the spell is suddenly broken and the philanthropist is ready to believe
that Negroes are impudent, that the South is right, and that Japan wants
to fight America.

After this the descent to Hell is easy. On the pale, white faces which
the great billows whirl upward to my tower I see again and again, often
and still more often, a writing of human hatred, a deep and passionate
hatred, vast by the very vagueness of its expressions. Down through the
green waters, on the bottom of the world, where men move to and fro, I
have seen a man--an educated gentleman--grow livid with anger because a
little, silent, black woman was sitting by herself in a Pullman car. He
was a white man. I have seen a great, grown man curse a little child,
who had wandered into the wrong waiting-room, searching for its mother:
"Here, you damned black--" He was white. In Central Park I have seen the
upper lip of a quiet, peaceful man curl back in a tigerish snarl of rage
because black folk rode by in a motor car. He was a white man. We have
seen, you and I, city after city drunk and furious with ungovernable
lust of blood; mad with murder, destroying, killing, and cursing;
torturing human victims because somebody accused of crime happened to be
of the same color as the mob's innocent victims and because that color
was not white! We have seen,--Merciful God! in these wild days and in
the name of Civilization, Justice, and Motherhood,--what have we not
seen, right here in America, of orgy, cruelty, barbarism, and murder
done to men and women of Negro descent.

Up through the foam of green and weltering waters wells this great mass
of hatred, in wilder, fiercer violence, until I look down and know that
today to the millions of my people no misfortune could happen,--of death
and pestilence, failure and defeat--that would not make the hearts of
millions of their fellows beat with fierce, vindictive joy! Do you doubt
it? Ask your own soul what it would say if the next census were to
report that half of black America was dead and the other half dying.

Unfortunate? Unfortunate. But where is the misfortune? Mine? Am I, in my
blackness, the sole sufferer? I suffer. And yet, somehow, above the
suffering, above the shackled anger that beats the bars, above the hurt
that crazes there surges in me a vast pity,--pity for a people
imprisoned and enthralled, hampered and made miserable for such a cause,
for such a phantasy!

Conceive this nation, of all human peoples, engaged in a crusade to
make the "World Safe for Democracy"! Can you imagine the United States
protesting against Turkish atrocities in Armenia, while the Turks are
silent about mobs in Chicago and St. Louis; what is Louvain compared
with Memphis, Waco, Washington, Dyersburg, and Estill Springs? In short,
what is the black man but America's Belgium, and how could America
condemn in Germany that which she commits, just as brutally, within her
own borders?

A true and worthy ideal frees and uplifts a people; a false ideal
imprisons and lowers. Say to men, earnestly and repeatedly: "Honesty is
best, knowledge is power; do unto others as you would be done by." Say
this and act it and the nation must move toward it, if not to it. But
say to a people: "The one virtue is to be white," and the people rush to
the inevitable conclusion, "Kill the 'nigger'!"

Is not this the record of present America? Is not this its headlong
progress? Are we not coming more and more, day by day, to making the
statement "I am white," the one fundamental tenet of our practical
morality? Only when this basic, iron rule is involved is our defense of
right nation-wide and prompt. Murder may swagger, theft may rule and
prostitution may flourish and the nation gives but spasmodic,
intermittent and lukewarm attention. But let the murderer be black or
the thief brown or the violator of womanhood have a drop of Negro blood,
and the righteousness of the indignation sweeps the world. Nor would
this fact make the indignation less justifiable did not we all know that
it was blackness that was condemned and not crime.

In the awful cataclysm of World War, where from beating, slandering, and
murdering us the white world turned temporarily aside to kill each
other, we of the Darker Peoples looked on in mild amaze.

Among some of us, I doubt not, this sudden descent of Europe into hell
brought unbounded surprise; to others, over wide area, it brought the
_Schaden Freude_ of the bitterly hurt; but most of us, I judge, looked
on silently and sorrowfully, in sober thought, seeing sadly the prophecy
of our own souls.

Here is a civilization that has boasted much. Neither Roman nor Arab,
Greek nor Egyptian, Persian nor Mongol ever took himself and his own
perfectness with such disconcerting seriousness as the modern white man.
We whose shame, humiliation, and deep insult his aggrandizement so often
involved were never deceived. We looked at him clearly, with world-old
eyes, and saw simply a human thing, weak and pitiable and cruel, even as
we are and were.

These super-men and world-mastering demi-gods listened, however, to no
low tongues of ours, even when we pointed silently to their feet of
clay. Perhaps we, as folk of simpler soul and more primitive type, have
been most struck in the welter of recent years by the utter failure of
white religion. We have curled our lips in something like contempt as we
have witnessed glib apology and weary explanation. Nothing of the sort
deceived us. A nation's religion is its life, and as such white
Christianity is a miserable failure.

Nor would we be unfair in this criticism: We know that we, too, have
failed, as you have, and have rejected many a Buddha, even as you have
denied Christ; but we acknowledge our human frailty, while you, claiming
super-humanity, scoff endlessly at our shortcomings.

The number of white individuals who are practising with even reasonable
approximation the democracy and unselfishness of Jesus Christ is so
small and unimportant as to be fit subject for jest in Sunday
supplements and in _Punch_, _Life_, _Le Rire_, and _Fliegende BlÃ¤tter_.
In her foreign mission work the extraordinary self-deception of white
religion is epitomized: solemnly the white world sends five million
dollars worth of missionary propaganda to Africa each year and in the
same twelve months adds twenty-five million dollars worth of the vilest
gin manufactured. Peace to the augurs of Rome!

We may, however, grant without argument that religious ideals have
always far outrun their very human devotees. Let us, then, turn to more
mundane matters of honor and fairness. The world today is trade. The
world has turned shopkeeper; history is economic history; living is
earning a living. Is it necessary to ask how much of high emprise and
honorable conduct has been found here? Something, to be sure. The
establishment of world credit systems is built on splendid and
realizable faith in fellow-men. But it is, after all, so low and
elementary a step that sometimes it looks merely like honor among
thieves, for the revelations of highway robbery and low cheating in the
business world and in all its great modern centers have raised in the
hearts of all true men in our day an exceeding great cry for revolution
in our basic methods and conceptions of industry and commerce.

We do not, for a moment, forget the robbery of other times and races
when trade was a most uncertain gamble; but was there not a certain
honesty and frankness in the evil that argued a saner morality? There
are more merchants today, surer deliveries, and wider well-being, but
are there not, also, bigger thieves, deeper injustice, and more
calloused selfishness in well-being? Be that as it may,--certainly the
nicer sense of honor that has risen ever and again in groups of
forward-thinking men has been curiously and broadly blunted. Consider
our chiefest industry,--fighting. Laboriously the Middle Ages built its
rules of fairness--equal armament, equal notice, equal conditions. What
do we see today? Machine-guns against assegais; conquest sugared with
religion; mutilation and rape masquerading as culture,--all this, with
vast applause at the superiority of white over black soldiers!

War is horrible! This the dark world knows to its awful cost. But has
it just become horrible, in these last days, when under essentially
equal conditions, equal armament, and equal waste of wealth white men
are fighting white men, with surgeons and nurses hovering near?

Think of the wars through which we have lived in the last decade: in
German Africa, in British Nigeria, in French and Spanish Morocco, in
China, in Persia, in the Balkans, in Tripoli, in Mexico, and in a dozen
lesser places--were not these horrible, too? Mind you, there were for
most of these wars no Red Cross funds.

Behold little Belgium and her pitiable plight, but has the world
forgotten Congo? What Belgium now suffers is not half, not even a tenth,
of what she has done to black Congo since Stanley's great dream of 1880.
Down the dark forests of inmost Africa sailed this modern Sir Galahad,
in the name of "the noble-minded men of several nations," to introduce
commerce and civilization. What came of it? "Rubber and murder, slavery
in its worst form," wrote Glave in 1895.

Harris declares that King Leopold's rÃ©gime meant the death of twelve
million natives, "but what we who were behind the scenes felt most
keenly was the fact that the real catastrophe in the Congo was
desolation and murder in the larger sense. The invasion of family life,
the ruthless destruction of every social barrier, the shattering of
every tribal law, the introduction of criminal practices which struck
the chiefs of the people dumb with horror--in a word, a veritable
avalanche of filth and immorality overwhelmed the Congo tribes."

Yet the fields of Belgium laughed, the cities were gay, art and science
flourished; the groans that helped to nourish this civilization fell on
deaf ears because the world round about was doing the same sort of thing
elsewhere on its own account.

As we saw the dead dimly through rifts of battlesmoke and heard faintly
the cursings and accusations of blood brothers, we darker men said: This
is not Europe gone mad; this is not aberration nor insanity; this _is_
Europe; this seeming Terrible is the real soul of white culture--back of
all culture,--stripped and visible today. This is where the world has
arrived,--these dark and awful depths and not the shining and ineffable
heights of which it boasted. Here is whither the might and energy of
modern humanity has really gone.

But may not the world cry back at us and ask: "What better thing have
you to show? What have you done or would do better than this if you had
today the world rule? Paint with all riot of hateful colors the thin
skin of European culture,--is it not better than any culture that arose
in Africa or Asia?"

It is. Of this there is no doubt and never has been; but why is it
better? Is it better because Europeans are better, nobler, greater, and
more gifted than other folk? It is not. Europe has never produced and
never will in our day bring forth a single human soul who cannot be
matched and over-matched in every line of human endeavor by Asia and
Africa. Run the gamut, if you will, and let us have the Europeans who in
sober truth over-match Nefertari, Mohammed, Rameses and Askia,
Confucius, Buddha, and Jesus Christ. If we could scan the calendar of
thousands of lesser men, in like comparison, the result would be the
same; but we cannot do this because of the deliberately educated
ignorance of white schools by which they remember Napoleon and forget
Sonni Ali.

The greatness of Europe has lain in the width of the stage on which she
has played her part, the strength of the foundations on which she has
builded, and a natural, human ability no whit greater (if as great) than
that of other days and races. In other words, the deeper reasons for the
triumph of European civilization lie quite outside and beyond
Europe,--back in the universal struggles of all mankind.

Why, then, is Europe great? Because of the foundations which the mighty
past have furnished her to build upon: the iron trade of ancient, black
Africa, the religion and empire-building of yellow Asia, the art and
science of the "dago" Mediterranean shore, east, south, and west, as
well as north. And where she has builded securely upon this great past
and learned from it she has gone forward to greater and more splendid
human triumph; but where she has ignored this past and forgotten and
sneered at it, she has shown the cloven hoof of poor, crucified
humanity,--she has played, like other empires gone, the world fool!

If, then, European triumphs in culture have been greater, so, too, may
her failures have been greater. How great a failure and a failure in
what does the World War betoken? Was it national jealousy of the sort of
the seventeenth century? But Europe has done more to break down national
barriers than any preceding culture. Was it fear of the balance of power
in Europe? Hardly, save in the half-Asiatic problems of the Balkans.
What, then, does Hauptmann mean when he says: "Our jealous enemies
forged an iron ring about our breasts and we knew our breasts had to
expand,--that we had to split asunder this ring or else we had to cease
breathing. But Germany will not cease to breathe and so it came to pass
that the iron ring was forced apart."

Whither is this expansion? What is that breath of life, thought to be so
indispensable to a great European nation? Manifestly it is expansion
overseas; it is colonial aggrandizement which explains, and alone
adequately explains, the World War. How many of us today fully realize
the current theory of colonial expansion, of the relation of Europe
which is white, to the world which is black and brown and yellow?
Bluntly put, that theory is this: It is the duty of white Europe to
divide up the darker world and administer it for Europe's good.

This Europe has largely done. The European world is using black and
brown men for all the uses which men know. Slowly but surely white
culture is evolving the theory that "darkies" are born beasts of burden
for white folk. It were silly to think otherwise, cries the cultured
world, with stronger and shriller accord. The supporting arguments grow
and twist themselves in the mouths of merchant, scientist, soldier,
traveler, writer, and missionary: Darker peoples are dark in mind as
well as in body; of dark, uncertain, and imperfect descent; of frailer,
cheaper stuff; they are cowards in the face of mausers and maxims; they
have no feelings, aspirations, and loves; they are fools, illogical
idiots,--"half-devil and half-child."

Such as they are civilization must, naturally, raise them, but soberly
and in limited ways. They are not simply dark white men. They are not
"men" in the sense that Europeans are men. To the very limited extent of
their shallow capacities lift them to be useful to whites, to raise
cotton, gather rubber, fetch ivory, dig diamonds,--and let them be paid
what men think they are worth--white men who know them to be well-nigh
worthless.

Such degrading of men by men is as old as mankind and the invention of
no one race or people. Ever have men striven to conceive of their
victims as different from the victors, endlessly different, in soul and
blood, strength and cunning, race and lineage. It has been left,
however, to Europe and to modern days to discover the eternal world-wide
mark of meanness,--color!

Such is the silent revolution that has gripped modern European culture
in the later nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Its zenith came in
Boxer times: White supremacy was all but world-wide, Africa was dead,
India conquered, Japan isolated, and China prostrate, while white
America whetted her sword for mongrel Mexico and mulatto South America,
lynching her own Negroes the while. Temporary halt in this program was
made by little Japan and the white world immediately sensed the peril of
such "yellow" presumption! What sort of a world would this be if yellow
men must be treated "white"? Immediately the eventual overthrow of Japan
became a subject of deep thought and intrigue, from St. Petersburg to
San Francisco, from the Key of Heaven to the Little Brother of the Poor.

The using of men for the benefit of masters is no new invention of
modern Europe. It is quite as old as the world. But Europe proposed to
apply it on a scale and with an elaborateness of detail of which no
former world ever dreamed. The imperial width of the thing,--the
heaven-defying audacity--makes its modern newness.

The scheme of Europe was no sudden invention, but a way out of
long-pressing difficulties. It is plain to modern white civilization
that the subjection of the white working classes cannot much longer be
maintained. Education, political power, and increased knowledge of the
technique and meaning of the industrial process are destined to make a
more and more equitable distribution of wealth in the near future. The
day of the very rich is drawing to a close, so far as individual white
nations are concerned. But there is a loophole. There is a chance for
exploitation on an immense scale for inordinate profit, not simply to
the very rich, but to the middle class and to the laborers. This chance
lies in the exploitation of darker peoples. It is here that the golden
hand beckons. Here are no labor unions or votes or questioning onlookers
or inconvenient consciences. These men may be used down to the very
bone, and shot and maimed in "punitive" expeditions when they revolt. In
these dark lands "industrial development" may repeat in exaggerated form
every horror of the industrial history of Europe, from slavery and rape
to disease and maiming, with only one test of success,--dividends!

This theory of human culture and its aims has worked itself through warp
and woof of our daily thought with a thoroughness that few realize.
Everything great, good, efficient, fair, and honorable is "white";
everything mean, bad, blundering, cheating, and dishonorable is
"yellow"; a bad taste is "brown"; and the devil is "black." The changes
of this theme are continually rung in picture and story, in newspaper
heading and moving-picture, in sermon and school book, until, of course,
the King can do no wrong,--a White Man is always right and a Black Man
has no rights which a white man is bound to respect.

There must come the necessary despisings and hatreds of these savage
half-men, this unclean _canaille_ of the world--these dogs of men. All
through the world this gospel is preaching. It has its literature, it
has its secret propaganda and above all--it pays!

There's the rub,--it pays. Rubber, ivory, and palm-oil; tea, coffee, and
cocoa; bananas, oranges, and other fruit; cotton, gold, and
copper--they, and a hundred other things which dark and sweating bodies
hand up to the white world from pits of slime, pay and pay well, but of
all that the world gets the black world gets only the pittance that the
white world throws it disdainfully.

Small wonder, then, that in the practical world of things-that-be there
is jealousy and strife for the possession of the labor of dark millions,
for the right to bleed and exploit the colonies of the world where this
golden stream may be had, not always for the asking, but surely for the
whipping and shooting. It was this competition for the labor of yellow,
brown, and black folks that was the cause of the World War. Other causes
have been glibly given and other contributing causes there doubtless
were, but they were subsidiary and subordinate to this vast quest of the
dark world's wealth and toil.

Colonies, we call them, these places where "niggers" are cheap and the
earth is rich; they are those outlands where like a swarm of hungry
locusts white masters may settle to be served as kings, wield the lash
of slave-drivers, rape girls and wives, grow as rich as Croesus and send
homeward a golden stream. They belt the earth, these places, but they
cluster in the tropics, with its darkened peoples: in Hong Kong and
Anam, in Borneo and Rhodesia, in Sierra Leone and Nigeria, in Panama and
Havana--these are the El Dorados toward which the world powers stretch
itching palms.

Germany, at last one and united and secure on land, looked across the
seas and seeing England with sources of wealth insuring a luxury and
power which Germany could not hope to rival by the slower processes of
exploiting her own peasants and workingmen, especially with these
workers half in revolt, immediately built her navy and entered into a
desperate competition for possession of colonies of darker peoples. To
South America, to China, to Africa, to Asia Minor, she turned like a
hound quivering on the leash, impatient, suspicious, irritable, with
blood-shot eyes and dripping fangs, ready for the awful word. England
and France crouched watchfully over their bones, growling and wary, but
gnawing industriously, while the blood of the dark world whetted their
greedy appetites. In the background, shut out from the highway to the
seven seas, sat Russia and Austria, snarling and snapping at each other
and at the last Mediterranean gate to the El Dorado, where the Sick Man
enjoyed bad health, and where millions of serfs in the Balkans, Russia,
and Asia offered a feast to greed well-nigh as great as Africa.

The fateful day came. It had to come. The cause of war is preparation
for war; and of all that Europe has done in a century there is nothing
that has equaled in energy, thought, and time her preparation for
wholesale murder. The only adequate cause of this preparation was
conquest and conquest, not in Europe, but primarily among the darker
peoples of Asia and Africa; conquest, not for assimilation and uplift,
but for commerce and degradation. For this, and this mainly, did Europe
gird herself at frightful cost for war.

The red day dawned when the tinder was lighted in the Balkans and
Austro-Hungary seized a bit which brought her a step nearer to the
world's highway; she seized one bit and poised herself for another. Then
came that curious chorus of challenges, those leaping suspicions, raking
all causes for distrust and rivalry and hatred, but saying little of the
real and greatest cause.

Each nation felt its deep interests involved. But how? Not, surely, in
the death of Ferdinand the Warlike; not, surely, in the old,
half-forgotten _revanche_ for Alsace-Lorraine; not even in the
neutrality of Belgium. No! But in the possession of land overseas, in
the right to colonies, the chance to levy endless tribute on the darker
world,--on coolies in China, on starving peasants in India, on black
savages in Africa, on dying South Sea Islanders, on Indians of the
Amazon--all this and nothing more.

Even the broken reed on which we had rested high hopes of eternal
peace,--the guild of the laborers--the front of that very important
movement for human justice on which we had builded most, even this flew
like a straw before the breath of king and kaiser. Indeed, the flying
had been foreshadowed when in Germany and America "international"
Socialists had all but read yellow and black men out of the kingdom of
industrial justice. Subtly had they been bribed, but effectively: Were
they not lordly whites and should they not share in the spoils of rape?
High wages in the United States and England might be the skilfully
manipulated result of slavery in Africa and of peonage in Asia.

With the dog-in-the-manger theory of trade, with the determination to
reap inordinate profits and to exploit the weakest to the utmost there
came a new imperialism,--the rage for one's own nation to own the earth
or, at least, a large enough portion of it to insure as big profits as
the next nation. Where sections could not be owned by one dominant
nation there came a policy of "open door," but the "door" was open to
"white people only." As to the darkest and weakest of peoples there was
but one unanimity in Europe,--that which Hen Demberg of the German
Colonial Office called the agreement with England to maintain white
"prestige" in Africa,--the doctrine of the divine right of white people
to steal.

Thus the world market most wildly and desperately sought today is the
market where labor is cheapest and most helpless and profit is most
abundant. This labor is kept cheap and helpless because the white world
despises "darkies." If one has the temerity to suggest that these
workingmen may walk the way of white workingmen and climb by votes and
self-assertion and education to the rank of men, he is howled out of
court. They cannot do it and if they could, they shall not, for they are
the enemies of the white race and the whites shall rule forever and
forever and everywhere. Thus the hatred and despising of human beings
from whom Europe wishes to extort her luxuries has led to such jealousy
and bickering between European nations that they have fallen afoul of
each other and have fought like crazed beasts. Such is the fruit of
human hatred.

But what of the darker world that watches? Most men belong to this
world. With Negro and Negroid, East Indian, Chinese, and Japanese they
form two-thirds of the population of the world. A belief in humanity is
a belief in colored men. If the uplift of mankind must be done by men,
then the destinies of this world will rest ultimately in the hands of
darker nations.

What, then, is this dark world thinking? It is thinking that as wild
and awful as this shameful war was, _it is nothing to compare with that
fight for freedom which black and brown and yellow men must and will
make unless their oppression and humiliation and insult at the hands of
the White World cease. The Dark World is going to submit to its present
treatment just as long as it must and not one moment longer._

Let me say this again and emphasize it and leave no room for mistaken
meaning: The World War was primarily the jealous and avaricious struggle
for the largest share in exploiting darker races. As such it is and must
be but the prelude to the armed and indignant protest of these despised
and raped peoples. Today Japan is hammering on the door of justice,
China is raising her half-manacled hands to knock next, India is
writhing for the freedom to knock, Egypt is sullenly muttering, the
Negroes of South and West Africa, of the West Indies, and of the United
States are just awakening to their shameful slavery. Is, then, this war
the end of wars? Can it be the end, so long as sits enthroned, even in
the souls of those who cry peace, the despising and robbing of darker
peoples? If Europe hugs this delusion, then this is not the end of world
war,--it is but the beginning!

We see Europe's greatest sin precisely where we found Africa's and
Asia's,--in human hatred, the despising of men; with this difference,
however: Europe has the awful lesson of the past before her, has the
splendid results of widened areas of tolerance, sympathy, and love among
men, and she faces a greater, an infinitely greater, world of men than
any preceding civilization ever faced.

It is curious to see America, the United States, looking on herself,
first, as a sort of natural peacemaker, then as a moral protagonist in
this terrible time. No nation is less fitted for this rÃ´le. For two or
more centuries America has marched proudly in the van of human
hatred,--making bonfires of human flesh and laughing at them hideously,
and making the insulting of millions more than a matter of
dislike,--rather a great religion, a world war-cry: Up white, down
black; to your tents, O white folk, and world war with black and
parti-colored mongrel beasts!

Instead of standing as a great example of the success of democracy and
the possibility of human brotherhood America has taken her place as an
awful example of its pitfalls and failures, so far as black and brown
and yellow peoples are concerned. And this, too, in spite of the fact
that there has been no actual failure; the Indian is not dying out, the
Japanese and Chinese have not menaced the land, and the experiment of
Negro suffrage has resulted in the uplift of twelve million people at a
rate probably unparalleled in history. But what of this? America, Land
of Democracy, wanted to believe in the failure of democracy so far as
darker peoples were concerned. Absolutely without excuse she established
a caste system, rushed into preparation for war, and conquered tropical
colonies. She stands today shoulder to shoulder with Europe in Europe's
worst sin against civilization. She aspires to sit among the great
nations who arbitrate the fate of "lesser breeds without the law" and
she is at times heartily ashamed even of the large number of "new" white
people whom her democracy has admitted to place and power. Against this
surging forward of Irish and German, of Russian Jew, Slav and "dago" her
social bars have not availed, but against Negroes she can and does take
her unflinching and immovable stand, backed by this new public policy of
Europe. She trains her immigrants to this despising of "niggers" from
the day of their landing, and they carry and send the news back to the
submerged classes in the fatherlands.

       *       *       *       *       *

All this I see and hear up in my tower, above the thunder of the seven
seas. From my narrowed windows I stare into the night that looms beneath
the cloud-swept stars. Eastward and westward storms are
breaking,--great, ugly whirlwinds of hatred and blood and cruelty. I
will not believe them inevitable. I will not believe that all that was
must be, that all the shameful drama of the past must be done again
today before the sunlight sweeps the silver seas.

If I cry amid this roar of elemental forces, must my cry be in vain,
because it is but a cry,--a small and human cry amid Promethean gloom?

Back beyond the world and swept by these wild, white faces of the awful
dead, why will this Soul of White Folk,--this modern Prometheus,--hang
bound by his own binding, tethered by a fable of the past? I hear his
mighty cry reverberating through the world, "I am white!" Well and good,
O Prometheus, divine thief! Is not the world wide enough for two colors,
for many little shinings of the sun? Why, then, devour your own vitals
if I answer even as proudly, "I am black!"





_The Riddle of the Sphinx_


    Dark daughter of the lotus leaves that watch the Southern Sea!
    Wan spirit of a prisoned soul a-panting to be free!
       The muttered music of thy streams, the whisper of the deep,
       Have kissed each other in God's name and kissed a world to sleep.

    The will of the world is a whistling wind, sweeping a cloud-swept sky,
    And not from the East and not from the West knelled that
         soul-waking cry,
       But out of the South,--the sad, black South--it screamed from
           the top of the sky,
       Crying: "Awake, O ancient race!" Wailing, "O woman, arise!"
    And crying and sighing and crying again as a voice in the
          midnight cries,--
    But the burden of white men bore her back and the white world
          stifled her sighs.

    The white world's vermin and filth:
         All the dirt of London,
         All the scum of New York;
         Valiant spoilers of women
         And conquerers of unarmed men;
         Shameless breeders of bastards,
         Drunk with the greed of gold,
         Baiting their blood-stained hooks
         With cant for the souls of the simple;
         Bearing the white man's burden
         Of liquor and lust and lies!

    Unthankful we wince in the East,
    Unthankful we wail from the westward,
    Unthankfully thankful, we curse,
    In the unworn wastes of the wild:
            I hate them, Oh!
            I hate them well,
            I hate them, Christ!
            As I hate hell!
            If I were God,
            I'd sound their knell
            This day!
    Who raised the fools to their glory,
    But black men of Egypt and Ind,
    Ethiopia's sons of the evening,
    Indians and yellow Chinese,
    Arabian children of morning,
    And mongrels of Rome and Greece?
            Ah, well!
    And they that raised the boasters
    Shall drag them down again,--
    Down with the theft of their thieving
    And murder and mocking of men;
    Down with their barter of women
    And laying and lying of creeds;
    Down with their cheating of childhood
    And drunken orgies of war,--
            down
              down
                deep down,
    Till the devil's strength be shorn,
    Till some dim, darker David, a-hoeing of his corn,
    And married maiden, mother of God,
    Bid the black Christ be born!
    Then shall our burden be manhood,
    Be it yellow or black or white;
    And poverty and justice and sorrow,
    The humble, and simple and strong
    Shall sing with the sons of morning
    And daughters of even-song:
      Black mother of the iron hills that ward the blazing sea,
      Wild spirit of a storm-swept soul, a-struggling to be free,
      Where 'neath the bloody finger-marks thy riven bosom quakes,
      Thicken the thunders of God's Voice and lo! a world awakes!




III

THE HANDS OF ETHIOPIA


"_Semper novi quid ex Africa_," cried the Roman proconsul, and he voiced
the verdict of forty centuries. Yet there are those who would write
world history and leave out of account this most marvelous of
continents. Particularly today most men assume that Africa is far afield
from the center of our burning social problems and especially from our
problem of world war.

Always Africa is giving us something new or some metempsychosis of a
world-old thing. On its black bosom arose one of the earliest, if not
the earliest, of self-protecting civilizations, which grew so mightily
that it still furnishes superlatives to thinking and speaking men. Out
of its darker and more remote forest fastnesses came, if we may credit
many recent scientists, the first welding of iron, and we know that
agriculture and trade flourished there when Europe was a wilderness.

Nearly every human empire that has arisen in the world, material and
spiritual, has found some of its greatest crises on this continent of
Africa, from Greece to Great Britain. As Mommsen says: "It was through
Africa that Christianity became the religion of the world." In Africa
the last flood of Germanic invasions spent itself within hearing of the
last gasp of Byzantium, and it was through Africa that Islam came to
play its great rÃ´le of conqueror and civilizer.

With the Renaissance and the widened world of modern thought Africa came
no less suddenly with her new-old gift. Shakespeare's "Ancient Pistol"
cries:

    A foutre for the world and worldlings base!
    I speak of Africa and golden joys!

He echoes a legend of gold from the days of Punt and Ophir to those of
Ghana, the Gold Coast, and the Rand. This thought had sent the world's
greed scurrying down the hot, mysterious coasts of Africa to the Good
Hope of gain, until for the first time a real world-commerce was born,
albeit it started as a commerce mainly in the bodies and souls of men.

The present problem of problems is nothing more than democracy beating
itself helplessly against the color bar,--purling, seeping, seething,
foaming to burst through, ever and again overwhelming the emerging
masses of white men in its rolling backwaters and held back by those who
dream of future kingdoms of greed built on black and brown and yellow
slavery.

The indictment of Africa against Europe is grave. For four hundred years
white Europe was the chief support of that trade in human beings which
first and last robbed black Africa of a hundred million human beings,
transformed the face of her social life, overthrew organized government,
distorted ancient industry, and snuffed out the lights of cultural
development. Today instead of removing laborers from Africa to distant
slavery, industry built on a new slavery approaches Africa to deprive
the natives of their land, to force them to toil, and to reap all the
profit for the white world.

It is scarcely necessary to remind the reader of the essential facts
underlying these broad assertions. A recent law of the Union of South
Africa assigns nearly two hundred and fifty million acres of the best of
natives' land to a million and a half whites and leaves thirty-six
million acres of swamp and marsh for four and a half-million blacks. In
Rhodesia over ninety million acres have been practically confiscated. In
the Belgian Congo all the land was declared the property of the state.

Slavery in all but name has been the foundation of the cocoa industry in
St. Thome and St. Principe and in the mines of the Rand. Gin has been
one of the greatest of European imports, having increased fifty per
cent. in ten years and reaching a total of at least twenty-five million
dollars a year today. Negroes of ability have been carefully gotten rid
of, deposed from authority, kept out of positions of influence, and
discredited in their people's eyes, while a caste of white overseers and
governing officials has appeared everywhere.

Naturally, the picture is not all lurid. David Livingstone has had his
successors and Europe has given Africa something of value in the
beginning of education and industry. Yet the balance of iniquity is
desperately large; but worse than that, it has aroused no world protest.
A great Englishman, familiar with African problems for a generation,
says frankly today: "There does not exist any real international
conscience to which you can appeal."

Moreover, that treatment shows no certain signs of abatement. Today in
England the Empire Resources Development Committee proposes to treat
African colonies as "crown estates" and by intensive scientific
exploitation of both land and labor to make these colonies pay the
English national debt after the war! German thinkers, knowing the
tremendous demand for raw material which would follow the war, had
similar plans of exploitation. "It is the clear, common sense of the
African situation," says H.G. Wells, "that while these precious regions
of raw material remain divided up between a number of competitive
European imperialisms, each resolutely set upon the exploitation of its
'possessions' to its own advantage and the disadvantage of the others,
there can be no permanent peace in the world. It is impossible."

We, then, who fought the war against war; who in a hell of blood and
suffering held hardly our souls in leash by the vision of a world
organized for peace; who are looking for industrial democracy and for
the organization of Europe so as to avoid incentives to war,--we, least
of all, should be willing to leave the backward world as the greatest
temptation, not only to wars based on international jealousies, but to
the most horrible of wars,--which arise from the revolt of the maddened
against those who hold them in common contempt.

Consider, my reader,--if you were today a man of some education and
knowledge, but born a Japanese or a Chinaman, an East Indian or a Negro,
what would you do and think? What would be in the present chaos your
outlook and plan for the future? Manifestly, you would want freedom for
your people,--freedom from insult, from segregation, from poverty, from
physical slavery. If the attitude of the European and American worlds is
in the future going to be based essentially upon the same policies as in
the past, then there is but one thing for the trained man of darker
blood to do and that is definitely and as openly as possible to organize
his world for war against Europe. He may have to do it by secret,
underground propaganda, as in Egypt and India and eventually in the
United States; or by open increase of armament, as in Japan; or by
desperate efforts at modernization, as in China; but he must do it. He
represents the vast majority of mankind. To surrender would be far worse
than physical death. There is no way out unless the white world gives up
such insult as its modern use of the adjective "yellow" indicates, or
its connotation of "chink" and "nigger" implies; either it gives up the
plan of color serfdom which its use of the other adjective "white"
implies, as indicating everything decent and every part of the world
worth living in,--or trouble is written in the stars!

It is, therefore, of singular importance after disquieting delay to see
the real Pacifist appear. Both England and Germany have recently been
basing their claims to parts of black Africa on the wishes and interests
of the black inhabitants. Lloyd George has declared "the general
principle of national self-determination applicable at least to German
Africa," while Chancellor Hertling once welcomed a discussion "on the
reconstruction of the world's colonial possessions."

The demand that an Africa for Africans shall replace the present
barbarous scramble for exploitation by individual states comes from
singularly different sources. Colored America demands that "the
conquered German colonies should not be returned to Germany, neither
should they be held by the Allies. Here is the opportunity for the
establishment of a nation that may never recur. Thousands of colored
men, sick of white arrogance and hypocrisy, see in this their race's
only salvation."

Sir Harry H. Johnston recently said: "If we are to talk, as we do,
sentimentally but justly about restoring the nationhood of Poland, about
giving satisfaction to the separatist feeling in Ireland, and about what
is to be done for European nations who are oppressed, then we can hardly
exclude from this feeling the countries of Africa."

Laborers, black laborers, on the Canal Zone write: "Out of this chaos
may be the great awakening of our race. There is cause for rejoicing. If
we fail to embrace this opportunity now, we fail to see how we will be
ever able to solve the race question. It is for the British Negro, the
French Negro, and the American Negro to rise to the occasion and start a
national campaign, jointly and collectively, with this aim in view."

From British West Africa comes the bitter complaint "that the West
Africans should have the right or opportunity to settle their future for
themselves is a thing which hardly enters the mind of the European
politician. That the Balkan States should be admitted to the Council of
Peace and decide the government under which they are to live is taken as
a matter of course because they are Europeans, but no extra-European is
credited, even by the extremist advocates of human equality, with any
right except to humbly accept the fate which Europe shall decide for
him."

Here, then, is the danger and the demand; and the real Pacifist will
seek to organize, not simply the masses in white nations, guarding
against exploitation and profiteering, but will remember that no
permanent relief can come but by including in this organization the
lowest and the most exploited races in the world. World philanthropy,
like national philanthropy, must come as uplift and prevention and not
merely as alleviation and religious conversion. Reverence for humanity,
as such, must be installed in the world, and Africa should be the
talisman.

Black Africa, including British, French, Belgian, Portuguese, Italian,
and Spanish possessions and the independent states of Abyssinia and
Liberia and leaving out of account Egypt and North Africa, on the one
hand, and South Africa, on the other, has an area of 8,200,000 square
miles and a population well over one hundred millions of black men,
with less than one hundred thousand whites.

Commercial exploitation in Africa has already larger results to show
than most people realize. Annually $200,000,000 worth of goods was
coming out of black Africa before the World War, including a third of
the world's supply of rubber, a quarter of all of the world's cocoa, and
practically all of the world's cloves, gum-arabic, and palm-oil. In
exchange there was being returned to Africa one hundred millions in
cotton cloth, twenty-five millions in iron and steel, and as much in
foods, and probably twenty-five millions in liquors.

Here are the beginnings of a modern industrial system: iron and steel
for permanent investment, bound to yield large dividends; cloth as the
cheapest exchange for invaluable raw material; liquor to tickle the
appetites of the natives and render the alienation of land and the
breakdown of customary law easier; eventually forced and contract labor
under white drivers to increase and systematize the production of raw
materials. These materials are capable of indefinite expansion: cotton
may yet challenge the southern United States, fruits and vegetables,
hides and skins, lumber and dye-stuffs, coffee and tea, grain and
tobacco, and fibers of all sorts can easily follow organized and
systematic toil.

Is it a paradise of industry we thus contemplate? It is much more likely
to be a hell. Under present plans there will be no voice or law or
custom to protect labor, no trades unions, no eight-hour laws, no
factory legislation,--nothing of that great body of legislation built up
in modern days to protect mankind from sinking to the level of beasts of
burden. All the industrial deviltry, which civilization has been driving
to the slums and the backwaters, will have a voiceless continent to
conceal it. If the slave cannot be taken from Africa, slavery can be
taken to Africa.

Who are the folk who live here? They are brown and black, curly and
crisp-haired, short and tall, and longheaded. Out of them in days
without date flowed the beginnings of Egypt; among them rose, later,
centers of culture at Ghana, Melle, and Timbuktu. Kingdoms and empires
flourished in Songhay and Zymbabwe, and art and industry in Yoruba and
Benin. They have fought every human calamity in its most hideous form
and yet today they hold some similar vestiges of a mighty past,--their
work in iron, their weaving and carving, their music and singing, their
tribal government, their town-meeting and marketplace, their desperate
valor in war.

Missionaries and commerce have left some good with all their evil. In
black Africa today there are more than a thousand government schools and
some thirty thousand mission schools, with a more or less regular
attendance of three-quarters of a million school children. In a few
cases training of a higher order is given chiefs' sons and selected
pupils. These beginnings of education are not much for so vast a land
and there is no general standard or set plan of development, but, after
all, the children of Africa are beginning to learn.

In black Africa today only one-seventeenth of the land and a ninth of
the people in Liberia and Abyssinia are approximately independent,
although menaced and policed by European capitalism. Half the land and
the people are in domains under Portugal, France, and Belgium, held with
the avowed idea of exploitation for the benefit of Europe under a system
of caste and color serfdom. Out of this dangerous nadir of development
stretch two paths: one is indicated by the condition of about three per
cent of the people who in Sierra Leone, the Gold Coast, and French
Senegal, are tending toward the path of modern development; the other
path, followed by a fourth of the land and people, has local
self-government and native customs and might evolve, if undisturbed, a
native culture along their own peculiar lines. A tenth of the land,
sparsely settled, is being monopolized and held for whites to make an
African Australia. To these later folk must be added the four and
one-half millions of the South African Union, who by every modern device
are being forced into landless serfdom.

Before the World War tendencies were strongly toward the destruction of
independent Africa, the industrial slavery of the mass of the blacks and
the encouragement of white immigration, where possible, to hold the
blacks in subjection.

Against this idea let us set the conception of a new African World
State, a Black Africa, applying to these peoples the splendid
pronouncements which have of late been so broadly and perhaps carelessly
given the world: recognizing in Africa the declaration of the American
Federation of Labor, that "no people must be forced under sovereignty
under which it does not wish to live"; recognizing in President Wilson's
message to the Russians, the "principle of the undictated development of
all peoples"; recognizing the resolution of the recent conference of the
Aborigines Protection Society of England, "that in any reconstruction of
Africa, which may result from this war, the interests of the native
inhabitants and also their wishes, in so far as those wishes can be
clearly ascertained, should be recognized as among the principal factors
upon which the decision of their destiny should be based." In other
words, recognizing for the first time in the history of the modern world
that black men are human.

It may not be possible to build this state at once. With the victory of
the Entente Allies, the German colonies, with their million of square
miles and one-half million black inhabitants, should form such a
nucleus. It would give Black Africa its physical beginnings. Beginning
with the German colonies two other sets of colonies could be added, for
obvious reasons. Neither Portugal nor Belgium has shown any particular
capacity for governing colonial peoples. Valid excuses may in both cases
be advanced, but it would certainly be fair to Belgium to have her start
her great task of reorganization after the World War with neither the
burden nor the temptation of colonies; and in the same way Portugal has,
in reality, the alternative of either giving up her colonies to an
African State or to some other European State in the near future. These
two sets of colonies would add 1,700,000 square miles and eighteen
million inhabitants. It would not, however, be fair to despoil Germany,
Belgium, and Portugal of their colonies unless, as Count Hertling once
demanded, the whole question of colonies be opened.

How far shall the modern world recognize nations which are not nations,
but combinations of a dominant caste and a suppressed horde of serfs?
Will it not be possible to rebuild a world with compact nations, empires
of self-governing elements, and colonies of backward peoples under
benevolent international control?

The great test would be easy. Does England propose to erect in India and
Nigeria nations brown and black which shall be eventually independent,
self-governing entities, with a full voice in the British Imperial
Government? If not, let these states either have independence at once
or, if unfitted for that, be put under international tutelage and
guardianship. It is possible that France, with her great heart, may
welcome a Black France,--an enlarged Senegal in Africa; but it would
seem that eventually all Africa south of twenty degrees north latitude
and north of the Union of South Africa should be included in a new
African State. Somaliland and Eritrea should be given to Abyssinia, and
then with Liberia we would start with two small, independent African
states and one large state under international control.

Does this sound like an impossible dream? No one could be blamed for so
regarding it before 1914. I, myself, would have agreed with them. But
since the nightmare of 1914-1918, since we have seen the impossible
happen and the unspeakable become so common as to cease to stir us; in a
day when Russia has dethroned her Czar, England has granted the suffrage
to women and is in the act of giving Home Rule to Ireland; when Germany
has adopted parliamentary government; when Jerusalem has been delivered
from the Turks; and the United States has taken control of its
railroads,--is it really so far-fetched to think of an Africa for the
Africans, guided by organized civilization?

No one would expect this new state to be independent and self-governing
from the start. Contrary, however, to present schemes for Africa the
world would expect independence and self-government as the only possible
end of the experiment At first we can conceive of no better way of
governing this state than through that same international control by
which we hope to govern the world for peace. A curious and instructive
parallel has been drawn by Simeon Strunsky: "Just as the common
ownership of the northwest territory helped to weld the colonies into
the United States, so could not joint and benevolent domination of
Africa and of other backward parts of the world be a cornerstone upon
which the future federation of the world could be built?"

From the British Labor Party comes this declaration: "With regard to the
colonies of the several belligerents in tropical Africa, from sea to
sea, the British Labor Movement disclaims all sympathy with the
imperialist idea that these should form the booty of any nation, should
be exploited for the profit of the capitalists, or should be used for
the promotion of the militarists' aims of government. In view of the
fact that it is impracticable here to leave the various peoples
concerned to settle their own destinies it is suggested that the
interests of humanity would be best served by the full and frank
abandonment by all the belligerents of any dreams of an African Empire;
the transfer of the present colonies of the European Powers in tropical
Africa, however, and the limits of this area may be defined to the
proposed Supernational Authority, or League of Nations."

Lloyd George himself has said in regard to the German colonies a word
difficult to restrict merely to them: "I have repeatedly declared that
they are held at the disposal of a conference, whose decision must have
primary regard to the wishes and interests of the native inhabitants of
such colonies. None of those territories is inhabited by Europeans. The
governing considerations, therefore, must be that the inhabitants should
be placed under the control of an administration acceptable to
themselves, one of whose main purposes will be to prevent their
exploitation for the benefit of European capitalists or governments."

The special commission for the government of this African State must,
naturally, be chosen with great care and thought. It must represent, not
simply governments, but civilization, science, commerce, social reform,
religious philanthropy without sectarian propaganda. It must include,
not simply white men, but educated and trained men of Negro blood. The
guiding principles before such a commission should be clearly
understood. In the first place, it ought by this time to be realized by
the labor movement throughout the world that no industrial democracy can
be built on industrial despotism, whether the two systems are in the
same country or in different countries, since the world today so nearly
approaches a common industrial unity. If, therefore, it is impossible in
any single land to uplift permanently skilled labor without also raising
common labor, so, too, there can be no permanent uplift of American or
European labor as long as African laborers are slaves.

Secondly, this building of a new African State does not mean the
segregation in it of all the world's black folk. It is too late in the
history of the world to go back to the idea of absolute racial
segregation. The new African State would not involve any idea of a vast
transplantation of the twenty-seven million Negroids of the western
world, of Africa, or of the gathering there of Negroid Asia. The Negroes
in the United States and the other Americas have earned the right to
fight out their problems where they are, but they could easily furnish
from time to time technical experts, leaders of thought, and
missionaries of culture for their backward brethren in the new Africa.

With these two principles, the practical policies to be followed out in
the government of the new states should involve a thorough and complete
system of modern education, built upon the present government, religion,
and customary laws of the natives. There should be no violent tampering
with the curiously efficient African institutions of local
self-government through the family and the tribe; there should be no
attempt at sudden "conversion" by religious propaganda. Obviously
deleterious customs and unsanitary usages must gradually be abolished,
but the general government, set up from without, must follow the example
of the best colonial administrators and build on recognized, established
foundations rather than from entirely new and theoretical plans.

The real effort to modernize Africa should be through schools rather
than churches. Within ten years, twenty million black children ought to
be in school. Within a generation young Africa should know the essential
outlines of modern culture and groups of bright African students could
be going to the world's great universities. From the beginning the
actual general government should use both colored and white officials
and later natives should be worked in. Taxation and industry could
follow the newer ideals of industrial democracy, avoiding private land
monopoly and poverty, and promoting co-operation in production and the
socialization of income. Difficulties as to capital and revenue would be
far less than many imagine. If a capable English administrator of
British Nigeria could with $1,500 build up a cocoa industry of twenty
million dollars annually, what might not be done in all Africa, without
gin, thieves, and hypocrisy?

Capital could not only be accumulated in Africa, but attracted from the
white world, with one great difference from present usage: no return so
fabulous would be offered that civilized lands would be tempted to
divert to colonial trade and invest materials and labor needed by the
masses at home, but rather would receive the same modest profits as
legitimate home industry offers.

There is no sense in asserting that the ideal of an African State, thus
governed and directed toward independence and self-government, is
impossible of realization. The first great essential is that the
civilized world believe in its possibility. By reason of a crime
(perhaps the greatest crime in human history) the modern world has been
systematically taught to despise colored peoples. Men of education and
decency ask, and ask seriously, if it is really possible to uplift
Africa. Are Negroes human, or, if human, developed far enough to absorb,
even under benevolent tutelage, any appreciable part of modern culture?
Has not the experiment been tried in Haiti and Liberia, and failed?

One cannot ignore the extraordinary fact that a world campaign beginning
with the slave-trade and ending with the refusal to capitalize the word
"Negro," leading through a passionate defense of slavery by attributing
every bestiality to blacks and finally culminating in the evident modern
profit which lies in degrading blacks,--all this has unconsciously
trained millions of honest, modern men into the belief that black folk
are sub-human. This belief is not based on science, else it would be
held as a postulate of the most tentative kind, ready at any time to be
withdrawn in the face of facts; the belief is not based on history, for
it is absolutely contradicted by Egyptian, Greek, Roman, Byzantine, and
Arabian experience; nor is the belief based on any careful survey of the
social development of men of Negro blood to-day in Africa and America.
It is simply passionate, deep-seated heritage, and as such can be moved
by neither argument nor fact. Only faith in humanity will lead the world
to rise above its present color prejudice.

Those who do believe in men, who know what black men have done in human
history, who have taken pains to follow even superficially the story of
the rise of the Negro in Africa, the West Indies, and the Americas of
our day know that our modern contempt of Negroes rests upon no
scientific foundation worth a moment's attention. It is nothing more
than a vicious habit of mind. It could as easily be overthrown as our
belief in war, as our international hatreds, as our old conception of
the status of women, as our fear of educating the masses, and as our
belief in the necessity of poverty. We can, if we will, inaugurate on
the Dark Continent a last great crusade for humanity. With Africa
redeemed Asia would be safe and Europe indeed triumphant.

I have not mentioned North and South Africa, because my eye was centered
on the main mass of the Negro race. Yet it is clear that for the
development of Central Africa, Egypt should be free and independent,
there along the highway to a free and independent India; while Morocco,
Algeria, Tunis, and Tripoli must become a part of Europe, with modern
development and home rule. South Africa, stripped of its black serfs and
their lands, must admit the resident natives and colored folk to its
body politic as equals.

The hands which Ethiopia shall soon stretch out unto God are not mere
hands of helplessness and supplication, but rather are they hands of
pain and promise; hard, gnarled, and muscled for the world's real work;
they are hands of fellowship for the half-submerged masses of a
distempered world; they are hands of helpfulness for an agonized God!

       *       *       *       *       *

Twenty centuries before Christ a great cloud swept over seas and settled
on Africa, darkening and well-nigh blotting out the culture of the land
of Egypt. For half a thousand years it rested there, until a black
woman, Queen Nefertari, "the most venerated figure in Egyptian history,"
rose to the throne of the Pharaohs and redeemed the world and her
people. Twenty centuries after Christ, Black Africa,--prostrated, raped,
and shamed, lies at the feet of the conquering Philistines of Europe.
Beyond the awful sea a black woman is weeping and waiting, with her sons
on her breast. What shall the end be? The world-old and fearful
things,--war and wealth, murder and luxury? Or shall it be a new
thing,--a new peace and a new democracy of all races,--a great humanity
of equal men? "_Semper novi quid ex Africa_!"




_The Princess of the Hither Isles_


Her soul was beautiful, wherefore she kept it veiled in lightly-laced
humility and fear, out of which peered anxiously and anon the white and
blue and pale-gold of her face,-beautiful as daybreak or as the laughing
of a child. She sat in the Hither Isles, well walled between the This
and Now, upon a low and silver throne, and leaned upon its armposts,
sadly looking upward toward the sun. Now the Hither Isles are flat and
cold and swampy, with drear-drab light and all manner of slimy, creeping
things, and piles of dirt and clouds of flying dust and sordid scraping
and feeding and noise.

She hated them and ever as her hands and busy feet swept back the dust
and slime her soul sat silver-throned, staring toward the great hill to
the westward, which shone so brilliant-golden beneath the sunlight and
above the sea.

The sea moaned and with it moaned the princess' soul, for she was
lonely,--very, very lonely, and full weary of the monotone of life. So
she was glad to see a moving in Yonder Kingdom on the mountainside,
where the sun shone warm, and when the king of Yonder Kingdom, silken in
robe and golden-crowned and warded by his hound, walked down along the
restless waters and sat beside the armpost of her throne, she wondered
why she could not love him and fly with him up the shining mountain's
side, out of the dirt and dust that nested between the This and Now. She
looked at him and tried to be glad, for he was bonny and good to look
upon, this king of Yonder Kingdom,--tall and straight, thin-lipped and
white and tawny. So, again, this last day, she strove to burn life into
his singularly sodden clay,--to put his icy soul aflame wherewith to
warm her own, to set his senses singing. Vacantly he heard her winged
words, staring and curling his long mustaches with vast thoughtfulness.
Then he said:

"We've found more gold in Yonder Kingdom."

"Hell seize your gold!" blurted the princess.

"No,--it's mine," he maintained stolidly.

She raised her eyes. "It belongs," she said, "to the Empire of the Sun."

"Nay,--the Sun belongs to us," said the king calmly as he glanced to
where Yonder Kingdom blushed above the sea. She glanced, too, and a
softness crept into her eyes.

"No, no," she murmured as with hesitating pause she raised her eyes
above the sea, above the hill, up into the sky where the sun hung silent
and splendid. Its robes were heaven's blue, lined and broidered in
living flame, and its crown was one vast jewel, glistening in glittering
glory that made the sun's own face a blackness,--the blackness of utter
light. With blinded, tear-filled eyes she peered into that formless
black and burning face and sensed in its soft, sad gleam unfathomed
understanding. With sudden, wild abandon she stretched her arms toward
it appealing, beseeching, entreating, and lo!

"Niggers and dagoes," said the king of Yonder Kingdom, glancing
carelessly backward and lighting in his lips a carefully rolled wisp of
fragrant tobacco. She looked back, too, but in half-wondering terror,
for it seemed--

A beggar man was creeping across the swamp, shuffling through the dirt
and slime. He was little and bald and black, rough-clothed, sodden with
dirt, and bent with toil. Yet withal something she sensed about him and
it seemed,--

The king of Yonder Kingdom lounged more comfortably beside the silver
throne and let curl a tiny trail of light-blue smoke.

"I hate beggars," he said, "especially brown and black ones." And he
then pointed at the beggar's retinue and laughed,--an unpleasant laugh,
welded of contempt and amusement. The princess looked and shrank on her
throne. He, the beggar man, was--was what? But his retinue,--that
squalid, sordid, parti-colored band of vacant, dull-faced filth and
viciousness--was writhing over the land, and he and they seemed almost
crouching underneath the scorpion lash of one tall skeleton, that looked
like Death, and the twisted woman whom men called Pain. Yet they all
walked as one.

The King of Yonder Kingdom laughed, but the princess shrank on her
throne, and the king on seeing her thus took a gold-piece from out of
his purse and tossed it carelessly to the passing throng. She watched it
with fascinated eyes,--how it rose and sailed and whirled and struggled
in the air, then seemed to burst, and upward flew its light and sheen
and downward dropped its dross. She glanced at the king, but he was
lighting a match. She watched the dross wallow in the slime, but the
sunlight fell on the back of the beggar's neck, and he turned his head.

The beggar passing afar turned his head and the princess straightened
on her throne; he turned his head and she shivered forward on her
silver seat; he looked upon her full and slow and suddenly she saw
within that formless black and burning face the same soft, glad gleam of
utter understanding, seen so many times before. She saw the suffering of
endless years and endless love that softened it. She saw the burning
passion of the sun and with it the cold, unbending duty-deeds of upper
air. All she had seen and dreamed of seeing in the rising, blazing sun
she saw now again and with it myriads more of human tenderness, of
longing, and of love. So, then, she knew. She rose as to a dream come
true, with solemn face and waiting eyes.

With her rose the king of Yonder Kingdom, almost eagerly.

"You'll come?" he cried. "You'll come and see my gold?" And then in
sudden generosity, he added: "You'll have a golden throne,-up there-when
we marry."

But she, looking up and on with radiant face, answered softly: "I come."

So down and up and on they mounted,-the black beggar man and his
cavalcade of Death and Pain, and then a space; and then a lone, black
hound that nosed and whimpered as he ran, and then a space; and then the
king of Yonder Kingdom in his robes, and then a space; and last the
princess of the Hither Isles, with face set sunward and lovelight in her
eyes.

And so they marched and struggled on and up through endless years and
spaces and ever the black beggar looked back past death and pain toward
the maid and ever the maid strove forward with lovelit eyes, but ever
the great and silken shoulders of the king of Yonder Kingdom arose
between the princess and the sun like a cloud of storms.

Now, finally, they neared unto the hillsides topmost shoulder and there
most eagerly the king bent to the bowels of the earth and bared its
golden entrails,-all green and gray and rusted-while the princess
strained her pitiful eyes aloft to where the beggar, set 'twixt Death
and Pain, whirled his slim back against the glory of the setting sun and
stood somber in his grave majesty, enhaloed and transfigured,
outstretching his long arms, and around all heaven glittered jewels in a
cloth of gold.

A while the princess stood and moaned in mad amaze, then with one wilful
wrench she bared the white flowers of her breast and snatching forth her
own red heart held it with one hand aloft while with the other she
gathered close her robe and poised herself.

The king of Yonder Kingdom looked upward quickly, curiously, still
fingering the earth, and saw the offer of her bleeding heart.

"It's a Negro!" he growled darkly; "it may not be."

The woman quivered.

"It's a nigger!" he repeated fiercely. "It's neither God nor man, but a
nigger!"

The princess stepped forward.

The king grasped his sword and looked north and east; he raised his
sword and looked south and west.

"I seek the sun," the princess sang, and started into the west.

"Never!" cried the king of Yonder Kingdom, "for such were blasphemy and
defilement and the making of all evil."

So, raising his great sword he struck with all his might, and more. Down
hissed the blow and it bit that little, white, heart-holding hand until
it flew armless and disbodied up through the sunlit air. Down hissed the
blow and it clove the whimpering hound until his last shriek shook the
stars. Down hissed the blow and it rent the earth. It trembled, fell
apart, and yawned to a chasm wide as earth from heaven, deep as hell,
and empty, cold, and silent.

On yonder distant shore blazed the mighty Empire of the Sun in warm and
blissful radiance, while on this side, in shadows cold and dark, gloomed
the Hither Isles and the hill that once was golden, but now was green
and slimy dross; all below was the sad and moaning sea, while between
the Here and There flew the severed hand and dripped the bleeding heart.

Then up from the soul of the princess welled a cry of dark
despair,--such a cry as only babe-raped mothers know and murdered loves.
Poised on the crumbling edge of that great nothingness the princess
hung, hungering with her eyes and straining her fainting ears against
the awful splendor of the sky.

Out from the slime and shadows groped the king, thundering: "Back--don't
be a fool!"

But down through the thin ether thrilled the still and throbbing warmth
of heaven's sun, whispering "Leap!"

And the princess leapt.




IV

OF WORK AND WEALTH


For fifteen years I was a teacher of youth. They were years out of the
fullness and bloom of my younger manhood. They were years mingled of
half breathless work, of anxious self-questionings, of planning and
replanning, of disillusion, or mounting wonder.

The teacher's life is a double one. He stands in a certain fear. He
tends to be stilted, almost dishonest, veiling himself before those
awful eyes. Not the eyes of Almighty God are so straight, so
penetrating, so all-seeing as the wonder-swept eyes of youth. You walk
into a room: to the left is a tall window, bright with colors of crimson
and gold and sunshine. Here are rows of books and there is a table.
Somber blackboards clothe the walls to the right and beside your desk is
the delicate ivory of a nobly cast head. But you see nothing of this:
you see only a silence and eyes,--fringed, soft eyes; hard eyes; eyes
great and small; eyes here so poignant with beauty that the sob
struggles in your throat; eyes there so hard with sorrow that laughter
wells up to meet and beat it back; eyes through which the mockery and
ridicule of hell or some pulse of high heaven may suddenly flash. Ah!
That mighty pause before the class,--that orison and benediction--how
much of my life it has been and made.

I fought earnestly against posing before my class. I tried to be natural
and honest and frank, but it was a bitter hard. What would you say to a
soft, brown face, aureoled in a thousand ripples of gray-black hair,
which knells suddenly: "Do you trust white people?" You do not and you
know that you do not, much as you want to; yet you rise and lie and say
you do; you must say it for her salvation and the world's; you repeat
that she must trust them, that most white folks are honest, and all the
while you are lying and every level, silent eye there knows you are
lying, and miserably you sit and lie on, to the greater glory of God.

I taught history and economics and something called "sociology" at
Atlanta University, where, as our Mr. Webster used to say, we professors
occupied settees and not mere chairs. I was fortunate with this teaching
in having vivid in the minds of my pupils a concrete social problem of
which we all were parts and which we desperately desired to solve. There
was little danger, then, of my teaching or of their thinking becoming
purely theoretical. Work and wage were thrilling realities to us all.
What did we study? I can tell you best by taking a concrete human case,
such as was continually leaping to our eyes and thought and demanding
understanding and interpretation and what I could bring of prophecy.

       *       *       *       *       *

St. Louis sprawls where mighty rivers meet,--as broad as Philadelphia,
but three stories high instead of two, with wider streets and dirtier
atmosphere, over the dull-brown of wide, calm rivers. The city overflows
into the valleys of Illinois and lies there, writhing under its grimy
cloud. The other city is dusty and hot beyond all dream,--a feverish
Pittsburg in the Mississippi Valley--a great, ruthless, terrible thing!
It is the sort that crushes man and invokes some living superman,--a
giant of things done, a clang of awful accomplishment.

Three men came wandering across this place. They were neither kings nor
wise men, but they came with every significance--perhaps even
greater--than that which the kings bore in the days of old. There was
one who came from the North,--brawny and riotous with energy, a man of
concentrated power, who held all the thunderbolts of modern capital in
his great fists and made flour and meat, iron and steel, cunning
chemicals, wood, paint and paper, transforming to endless tools a
disemboweled earth. He was one who saw nothing, knew nothing, sought
nothing but the making and buying of that which sells; who out from the
magic of his hand rolled over miles of iron road, ton upon ton of food
and metal and wood, of coal and oil and lumber, until the thronging of
knotted ways in East and real St. Louis was like the red, festering
ganglia of some mighty heart.

Then from the East and called by the crash of thunderbolts and
forked-flame came the Unwise Man,--unwise by the theft of endless ages,
but as human as anything God ever made. He was the slave for the miracle
maker. It was he that the thunderbolts struck and electrified into
gasping energy. The rasp of his hard breathing shook the midnights of
all this endless valley and the pulse of his powerful arms set the great
nation to trembling.

And then, at last, out of the South, like a still, small voice, came the
third man,--black, with great eyes and greater memories; hesitantly
eager and yet with the infinite softness and ancient calm which come
from that eternal race whose history is not the history of a day, but
of endless ages. Here, surely, was fit meeting-place for these curiously
intent forces, for these epoch-making and age-twisting forces, for these
human feet on their super-human errands.

Yesterday I rode in East St. Louis. It is the kind of place one quickly
recognizes,--tireless and with no restful green of verdure; hard and
uneven of street; crude, cold, and even hateful of aspect; conventional,
of course, in its business quarter, but quickly beyond one sees the ruts
and the hollows, the stench of ill-tamed sewerage, unguarded railroad
crossings, saloons outnumbering churches and churches catering to
saloons; homes impudently strait and new, prostitutes free and happy,
gamblers in paradise, the town "wide open," shameless and frank; great
factories pouring out stench, filth, and flame--these and all other
things so familiar in the world market places, where industry triumphs
over thought and products overwhelm men. May I tell, too, how yesterday
I rode in this city past flame-swept walls and over gray ashes; in
streets almost wet with blood and beside ruins, where the bones of dead
men new-bleached peered out at me in sullen wonder?

Across the river, in the greater city, where bronze St. Louis,--that
just and austere king--looks with angry, fear-swept eyes down from the
rolling heights of Forest Park, which knows him not nor heeds him, there
is something of the same thing, but this city is larger and older and
the forces of evil have had some curbing from those who have seen the
vision and panted for life; but eastward from St. Louis there is a land
of no taxes for great industries; there is a land where you may buy
grafting politicians at far less rate than you would pay for franchises
or privileges in a modern town. There, too, you may escape the buying of
indulgences from the great terminal fist, which squeezes industry out of
St. Louis. In fact, East St. Louis is a paradise for high and frequent
dividends and for the piling up of wealth to be spent in St. Louis and
Chicago and New York and when the world is sane again, across the seas.

So the Unwise Men pouring out of the East,--falling, scrambling, rushing
into America at the rate of a million a year,--ran, walked, and crawled
to this maelstrom of the workers. They garnered higher wage than ever
they had before, but not all of it came in cash. A part, and an
insidious part, was given to them transmuted into whiskey, prostitutes,
and games of chance. They laughed and disported themselves. God! Had not
their mothers wept enough? It was a good town. There was no veil of
hypocrisy here, but a wickedness, frank, ungilded, and open. To be sure,
there were things sometimes to reveal the basic savagery and thin
veneer. Once, for instance, a man was lynched for brawling on the public
square of the county seat; once a mayor who sought to "clean up" was
publicly assassinated; always there was theft and rumors of theft,
until St. Clair County was a hissing in good men's ears; but always,
too, there were good wages and jolly hoodlums and unchecked wassail of
Saturday nights. Gamblers, big and little, rioted in East St. Louis. The
little gamblers used cards and roulette wheels and filched the weekly
wage of the workers. The greater gamblers used meat and iron and undid
the foundations of the world. All the gods of chance flaunted their wild
raiment here, above the brown flood of the Mississippi.

Then the world changed; then civilization, built for culture, rebuilt
itself for wilful murder in Europe, Asia, America, and the Southern
Seas. Hands that made food made powder, and iron for railways was iron
for guns. The wants of common men were forgotten before the groan of
giants. Streams of gold, lost from the world's workers, filtered and
trickled into the hands of gamblers and put new power into the
thunderbolts of East St. Louis.

Wages had been growing before the World War. Slowly but remorselessly
the skilled and intelligent, banding themselves, had threatened the
coffers of the mighty, and slowly the mighty had disgorged. Even the
common workers, the poor and unlettered, had again and again gripped the
sills of the city walls and pulled themselves to their chins; but, alas!
there were so many hands and so many mouths and the feet of the
Disinherited kept coming across the wet paths of the sea to this old El
Dorado.

War brought subtle changes. Wages stood still while prices fattened. It
was not that the white American worker was threatened with starvation,
but it was what was, after all, a more important question,--whether or
not he should lose his front-room and victrola and even the dream of a
Ford car.

There came a whirling and scrambling among the workers,--they fought
each other; they climbed on each others' backs. The skilled and
intelligent, banding themselves even better than before, bargained with
the men of might and held them by bitter threats; the less skilled and
more ignorant seethed at the bottom and tried, as of old, to bring it
about that the ignorant and unlettered should learn to stand together
against both capital and skilled labor.

It was here that there came out of the East a beam of unearthly
light,--a triumph of possible good in evil so strange that the workers
hardly believed it. Slowly they saw the gates of Ellis Island closing,
slowly the footsteps of the yearly million men became fainter and
fainter, until the stream of immigrants overseas was stopped by the
shadow of death at the very time when new murder opened new markets over
all the world to American industry; and the giants with the thunderbolts
stamped and raged and peered out across the world and called for men and
evermore,--men!

The Unwise Men laughed and squeezed reluctant dollars out of the fists
of the mighty and saw in their dream the vision of a day when labor, as
they knew it, should come into its own; saw this day and saw it with
justice and with right, save for one thing, and that was the sound of
the moan of the Disinherited, who still lay without the walls. When they
heard this moan and saw that it came not across the seas, they were at
first amazed and said it was not true; and then they were mad and said
it should not be. Quickly they turned and looked into the red blackness
of the South and in their hearts were fear and hate!

What did they see? They saw something at which they had been taught to
laugh and make sport; they saw that which the heading of every newspaper
column, the lie of every cub reporter, the exaggeration of every press
dispatch, and the distortion of every speech and book had taught them
was a mass of despicable men, inhuman; at best, laughable; at worst, the
meat of mobs and fury.

What did they see? They saw nine and one-half millions of human beings.
They saw the spawn of slavery, ignorant by law and by deviltry, crushed
by insult and debauched by systematic and criminal injustice. They saw a
people whose helpless women have been raped by thousands and whose men
lynched by hundreds in the face of a sneering world. They saw a people
with heads bloody, but unbowed, working faithfully at wages fifty per
cent. lower than the wages of the nation and under conditions which
shame civilization, saving homes, training children, hoping against
hope. They saw the greatest industrial miracle of modern days,--slaves
transforming themselves to freemen and climbing out of perdition by
their own efforts, despite the most contemptible opposition God ever
saw,--they saw all this and what they saw the distraught employers of
America saw, too.

The North called to the South. A scream of rage went up from the cotton
monopolists and industrial barons of the new South. Who was this who
dared to "interfere" with their labor? Who sought to own their black
slaves but they? Who honored and loved "niggers" as they did?

They mobilized all the machinery of modern oppression: taxes, city
ordinances, licenses, state laws, municipal regulations, wholesale
police arrests and, of course, the peculiarly Southern method of the mob
and the lyncher. They appealed frantically to the United States
Government; they groveled on their knees and shed wild tears at the
"suffering" of their poor, misguided black friends, and yet, despite
this, the Northern employers simply had to offer two and three dollars a
day and from one-quarter to one-half a million dark workers arose and
poured themselves into the North. They went to the mines of West
Virginia, because war needs coal; they went to the industries of New
Jersey and Pennsylvania, because war needs ships and iron; they went to
the automobiles of Detroit and the load-carrying of Chicago; and they
went to East St. Louis.

Now there came fear in the hearts of the Unwise Men. It was not that
their wages were lowered,--they went even higher. They received, not
simply, a living wage, but a wage that paid for some of the decencies,
and, in East St. Louis, many of the indecencies of life. What they
feared was not deprivation of the things they were used to and the
shadow of poverty, but rather the definite death of their rising dreams.
But if fear was new-born in the hearts of the Unwise Men, the black man
was born in a house of fear; to him poverty of the ugliest and straitest
type was father, mother, and blood-brother. He was slipping stealthily
northward to escape hunger and insult, the hand of oppression, and the
shadow of death.

Here, then, in the wide valley which Father Marquette saw peaceful and
golden, lazy with fruit and river, half-asleep beneath the nod of
God,--here, then, was staged every element for human tragedy, every
element of the modern economic paradox.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ah! That hot, wide plain of East St. Louis is a gripping thing. The
rivers are dirty with sweat and toil and lip, like lakes, along the low
and burdened shores; flatboats ramble and thread among them, and above
the steamers bridges swing on great arches of steel, striding with
mighty grace from shore to shore. Everywhere are brick kennels,--tall,
black and red chimneys, tongues of flame. The ground is littered with
cars and iron, tracks and trucks, boxes and crates, metals and coal and
rubber. Nature-defying cranes, grim elevators rise above pile on pile of
black and grimy lumber. And ever below is the water,--wide and silent,
gray-brown and yellow.

This is the stage for the tragedy: the armored might of the modern world
urged by the bloody needs of the world wants, fevered today by a
fabulous vision of gain and needing only hands, hands, hands! Fear of
loss and greed of gain in the hearts of the giants; the clustered
cunning of the modern workman, skilled as artificer and skilled in the
rhythm of the habit of work, tasting the world's good and panting for
more; fear of poverty and hate of "scabs" in the hearts of the workers;
the dumb yearning in the hearts of the oppressed; the echo of laughter
heard at the foot of the Pyramids; the faithful, plodding slouch of the
laborers; fear of the Shadow of Death in the hearts of black men.

We ask, and perhaps there is no answer, how far may the captain of the
world's industry do his deeds, despite the grinding tragedy of its
doing? How far may men fight for the beginning of comfort, out beyond
the horrid shadow of poverty, at the cost of starving other and what the
world calls lesser men? How far may those who reach up out of the slime
that fills the pits of the world's damned compel men with loaves to
divide with men who starve?

The answers to these questions are hard, but yet one answer looms above
all,--justice lies with the lowest; the plight of the lowest man,--the
plight of the black man--deserves the first answer, and the plight of
the giants of industry, the last.

Little cared East St. Louis for all this bandying of human problems, so
long as its grocers and saloon-keepers flourished and its industries
steamed and screamed and smoked and its bankers grew rich. Stupidity,
license, and graft sat enthroned in the City Hall. The new black folk
were exploited as cheerfully as white Polacks and Italians; the rent of
shacks mounted merrily, the street car lines counted gleeful gains, and
the crimes of white men and black men flourished in the dark. The high
and skilled and smart climbed on the bent backs of the ignorant; harder
the mass of laborers strove to unionize their fellows and to bargain
with employers.

Nor were the new blacks fools. They had no love for nothings in labor;
they had no wish to make their fellows' wage envelopes smaller, but they
were determined to make their own larger. They, too, were willing to
join in the new union movement. But the unions did not want them. Just
as employers monopolized meat and steel, so they sought to monopolize
labor and beat a giant's bargain. In the higher trades they succeeded.
The best electrician in the city was refused admittance to the union and
driven from the town because he was black. No black builder, printer, or
machinist could join a union or work in East St. Louis, no matter what
his skill or character. But out of the stink of the stockyards and the
dust of the aluminum works and the sweat of the lumber yards the willing
blacks could not be kept.

They were invited to join unions of the laborers here and they joined.
White workers and black workers struck at the aluminum works in the fall
and won higher wages and better hours; then again in the spring they
struck to make bargaining compulsory for the employer, but this time
they fronted new things. The conflagration of war had spread to America;
government and court stepped in and ordered no hesitation, no strikes;
the work must go on.

Deeper was the call for workers. Black men poured in and red anger
flamed in the hearts of the white workers. The anger was against the
wielders of the thunderbolts, but here it was impotent because employers
stood with the hand of the government before their faces; it was against
entrenched union labor, which had risen on the backs of the unskilled
and unintelligent and on the backs of those whom for any reason of race
or prejudice or chicane they could beat beyond the bars of competition;
and finally the anger of the mass of white workers was turned toward
these new black interlopers, who seemed to come to spoil their last
dream of a great monopoly of common labor.

These angers flamed and the union leaders, fearing their fury and
knowing their own guilt, not only in the larger and subtler matter of
bidding their way to power across the weakness of their less fortunate
fellows, but also conscious of their part in making East St. Louis a
miserable town of liquor and lust, leaped quickly to ward the gathering
thunder from their own heads. The thing they wanted was even at their
hands: here were black men, guilty not only of bidding for jobs which
white men could have held at war prices, even if they could not fill,
but also guilty of being black! It was at this blackness that the unions
pointed the accusing finger. It was here that they committed the
unpardonable crime. It was here that they entered the Shadow of Hell,
where suddenly from a fight for wage and protection against industrial
oppression East St. Louis became the center of the oldest and nastiest
form of human oppression,--race hatred.

The whole situation lent itself to this terrible transformation.
Everything in the history of the United States, from slavery to Sunday
supplements, from disfranchisement to residence segregation, from
"Jim-Crow" cars to a "Jim-Crow" army draft--all this history of
discrimination and insult festered to make men think and willing to
think that the venting of their unbridled anger against 12,000,000
humble, upstriving workers was a way of settling the industrial tangle
of the ages. It was the logic of the broken plate, which, seared of old
across its pattern, cracks never again, save along the old destruction.

So hell flamed in East St. Louis! The white men drove even black union
men out of their unions and when the black men, beaten by night and
assaulted, flew to arms and shot back at the marauders, five thousand
rioters arose and surged like a crested stormwave, from noonday until
midnight; they killed and beat and murdered; they dashed out the brains
of children and stripped off the clothes of women; they drove victims
into the flames and hanged the helpless to the lighting poles. Fathers
were killed before the faces of mothers; children were burned; heads
were cut off with axes; pregnant women crawled and spawned in dark, wet
fields; thieves went through houses and firebrands followed; bodies were
thrown from bridges; and rocks and bricks flew through the air.

The Negroes fought. They grappled with the mob like beasts at bay. They
drove them back from the thickest cluster of their homes and piled the
white dead on the street, but the cunning mob caught the black men
between the factories and their homes, where they knew they were armed
only with their dinner pails. Firemen, policemen, and militiamen stood
with hanging hands or even joined eagerly with the mob.

It was the old world horror come to life again: all that Jews suffered
in Spain and Poland; all that peasants suffered in France, and Indians
in Calcutta; all that aroused human deviltry had accomplished in ages
past they did in East St. Louis, while the rags of six thousand
half-naked black men and women fluttered across the bridges of the calm
Mississippi.

The white South laughed,--it was infinitely funny--the "niggers" who had
gone North to escape slavery and lynching had met the fury of the mob
which they had fled. Delegations rushed North from Mississippi and
Texas, with suspicious timeliness and with great-hearted offers to take
these workers back to a lesser hell. The man from Greensville,
Mississippi, who wanted a thousand got six, because, after all, the end
was not so simple.

No, the end was not simple. On the contrary, the problem raised by East
St. Louis was curiously complex. The ordinary American, tired of the
persistence of "the Negro problem," sees only another anti-Negro mob and
wonders, not when we shall settle this problem, but when we shall be
well rid of it. The student of social things sees another mile-post in
the triumphant march of union labor; he is sorry that blood and rapine
should mark its march,--but, what will you? War is life!

Despite these smug reasonings the bare facts were these: East St. Louis,
a great industrial center, lost 5,000 laborers,--good, honest,
hard-working laborers. It was not the criminals, either black or white,
who were driven from East St. Louis. They are still there. They will
stay there. But half the honest black laborers were gone. The crippled
ranks of industrial organization in the mid-Mississippi Valley cannot be
recruited from Ellis Island, because in Europe men are dead and maimed,
and restoration, when restoration comes, will raise a European demand
for labor such as this age has never seen. The vision of industrial
supremacy has come to the giants who lead American industry and finance.
But it can never be realized unless the laborers are here to do the
work,--the skilled laborers, the common laborers, the willing laborers,
the well-paid laborers. The present forces, organized however cunningly,
are not large enough to do what America wants; but there is another
group of laborers, 12,000,000 strong, the natural heirs, by every logic
of justice, to the fruits of America's industrial advance. They will be
used simply because they must be used,--but their using means East St.
Louis!

Eastward from St. Louis lie great centers, like Chicago, Indianapolis,
Detroit, Cleveland, Pittsburg, Philadelphia, and New York; in every one
of these and in lesser centers there is not only the industrial unrest
of war and revolutionized work, but there is the call for workers, the
coming of black folk, and the deliberate effort to divert the thoughts
of men, and particularly of workingmen, into channels of race hatred
against blacks. In every one of these centers what happened in East St.
Louis has been attempted, with more or less success. Yet the American
Negroes stand today as the greatest strategic group in the world. Their
services are indispensable, their temper and character are fine, and
their souls have seen a vision more beautiful than any other mass of
workers. They may win back culture to the world if their strength can be
used with the forces of the world that make for justice and not against
the hidden hates that fight for barbarism. For fight they must and fight
they will!

Rising on wings we cross again the rivers of St. Louis, winding and
threading between the towers of industry that threaten and drown the
towers of God. Far, far beyond, we sight the green of fields and hills;
but ever below lies the river, blue,--brownish-gray, touched with the
hint of hidden gold. Drifting through half-flooded lowlands, with
shanties and crops and stunted trees, past struggling corn and
straggling village, we rush toward the Battle of the Marne and the West,
from this dread Battle of the East. Westward, dear God, the fire of Thy
Mad World crimsons our Heaven. Our answering Hell rolls eastward from
St. Louis.

       *       *       *       *       *

Here, in microcosm, is the sort of economic snarl that arose continually
for me and my pupils to solve. We could bring to its unraveling little
of the scholarly aloofness and academic calm of most white universities.
To us this thing was Life and Hope and Death!

How should we think such a problem through, not simply as Negroes, but
as men and women of a new century, helping to build a new world? And
first of all, here is no simple question of race antagonism. There are
no races, in the sense of great, separate, pure breeds of men, differing
in attainment, development, and capacity. There are great groups,--now
with common history, now with common interests, now with common
ancestry; more and more common experience and present interest drive
back the common blood and the world today consists, not of races, but of
the imperial commercial group of master capitalists, international and
predominantly white; the national middle classes of the several nations,
white, yellow, and brown, with strong blood bonds, common languages, and
common history; the international laboring class of all colors; the
backward, oppressed groups of nature-folk, predominantly yellow, brown,
and black.

Two questions arise from the work and relations of these groups: how to
furnish goods and services for the wants of men and how equitably and
sufficiently to satisfy these wants. There can be no doubt that we have
passed in our day from a world that could hardly satisfy the physical
wants of the mass of men, by the greatest effort, to a world whose
technique supplies enough for all, if all can claim their right. Our
great ethical question today is, therefore, how may we justly distribute
the world's goods to satisfy the necessary wants of the mass of men.

What hinders the answer to this question? Dislikes, jealousies,
hatreds,--undoubtedly like the race hatred in East St. Louis; the
jealousy of English and German; the dislike of the Jew and the Gentile.
But these are, after all, surface disturbances, sprung from ancient
habit more than from present reason. They persist and are encouraged
because of deeper, mightier currents. If the white workingmen of East
St. Louis felt sure that Negro workers would not and could not take the
bread and cake from their mouths, their race hatred would never have
been translated into murder. If the black workingmen of the South could
earn a decent living under decent circumstances at home, they would not
be compelled to underbid their white fellows.

Thus the shadow of hunger, in a world which never needs to be hungry,
drives us to war and murder and hate. But why does hunger shadow so vast
a mass of men? Manifestly because in the great organizing of men for
work a few of the participants come out with more wealth than they can
possibly use, while a vast number emerge with less than can decently
support life. In earlier economic stages we defended this as the reward
of Thrift and Sacrifice, and as the punishment of Ignorance and Crime.
To this the answer is sharp: Sacrifice calls for no such reward and
Ignorance deserves no such punishment. The chief meaning of our present
thinking is that the disproportion between wealth and poverty today
cannot be adequately accounted for by the thrift and ignorance of the
rich and the poor.

Yesterday we righted one great mistake when we realized that the
ownership of the laborer did not tend to increase production. The world
at large had learned this long since, but black slavery arose again in
America as an inexplicable anachronism, a wilful crime. The freeing of
the black slaves freed America. Today we are challenging another
ownership,-the ownership of materials which go to make the goods we
need. Private ownership of land, tools, and raw materials may at one
stage of economic development be a method of stimulating production and
one which does not greatly interfere with equitable distribution. When,
however, the intricacy and length of technical production increased, the
ownership of these things becomes a monopoly, which easily makes the
rich richer and the poor poorer. Today, therefore, we are challenging
this ownership; we are demanding general consent as to what materials
shall be privately owned and as to how materials shall be used. We are
rapidly approaching the day when we shall repudiate all private property
in raw materials and tools and demand that distribution hinge, not on
the power of those who monopolize the materials, but on the needs of the
mass of men.

Can we do this and still make sufficient goods, justly gauge the needs
of men, and rightly decide who are to be considered "men"? How do we
arrange to accomplish these things today? Somebody decides whose wants
should be satisfied. Somebody organizes industry so as to satisfy these
wants. What is to hinder the same ability and foresight from being used
in the future as in the past? The amount and kind of human ability
necessary need not be decreased,--it may even be vastly increased, with
proper encouragement and rewards. Are we today evoking the necessary
ability? On the contrary, it is not the Inventor, the Manager, and the
Thinker who today are reaping the great rewards of industry, but rather
the Gambler and the Highwayman. Rightly-organized industry might easily
save the Gambler's Profit and the Monopolist's Interest and by paying a
more discriminating reward in wealth and honor bring to the service of
the state more ability and sacrifice than we can today command. If we do
away with interest and profit, consider the savings that could be made;
but above all, think how great the revolution would be when we ask the
mysterious Somebody to decide in the light of public opinion whose wants
should be satisfied. This is the great and real revolution that is
coming in future industry.

But this is not the need of the revolution nor indeed, perhaps, its real
beginning. What we must decide sometime is who are to be considered
"men." Today, at the beginning of this industrial change, we are
admitting that economic classes must give way. The laborers' hire must
increase, the employers' profit must be curbed. But how far shall this
change go? Must it apply to all human beings and to all work throughout
the world?

Certainly not. We seek to apply it slowly and with some reluctance to
white men and more slowly and with greater reserve to white women, but
black folk and brown and for the most part yellow folk we have widely
determined shall not be among those whose needs must justly be heard and
whose wants must be ministered to in the great organization of world
industry.

In the teaching of my classes I was not willing to stop with showing
that this was unfair,--indeed I did not have to do this. They knew
through bitter experience its rank injustice, because they were black.
What I had to show was that no real reorganization of industry could be
permanently made with the majority of mankind left out. These
disinherited darker peoples must either share in the future industrial
democracy or overturn the world.

Of course, the foundation of such a system must be a high, ethical
ideal. We must really envisage the wants of humanity. We must want the
wants of all men. We must get rid of the fascination for exclusiveness.
Here, in a world full of folk, men are lonely. The rich are lonely. We
are all frantic for fellow-souls, yet we shut souls out and bar the ways
and bolster up the fiction of the Elect and the Superior when the great
mass of men is capable of producing larger and larger numbers for every
human height of attainment. To be sure, there are differences between
men and groups and there will ever be, but they will be differences of
beauty and genius and of interest and not necessarily of ugliness,
imbecility, and hatred.

The meaning of America is the beginning of the discovery of the Crowd.
The crowd is not so well-trained as a Versailles garden party of Louis
XIV, but it is far better trained than the Sans-culottes and it has
infinite possibilities. What a world this will be when human
possibilities are freed, when we discover each other, when the stranger
is no longer the potential criminal and the certain inferior!

What hinders our approach to the ideals outlined above? Our profit from
degradation, our colonial exploitation, our American attitude toward the
Negro. Think again of East St. Louis! Think back of that to slavery and
Reconstruction! Do we want the wants of American Negroes satisfied? Most
certainly not, and that negative is the greatest hindrance today to the
reorganization of work and redistribution of wealth, not only in
America, but in the world.

All humanity must share in the future industrial democracy of the world.
For this it must be trained in intelligence and in appreciation of the
good and the beautiful. Present Big Business,--that Science of Human
Wants--must be perfected by eliminating the price paid for waste, which
is Interest, and for Chance, which is Profit, and making all income a
personal wage for service rendered by the recipient; by recognizing no
possible human service as great enough to enable a person to designate
another as an idler or as a worker at work which he cannot do. Above
all, industry must minister to the wants of the many and not to the few,
and the Negro, the Indian, the Mongolian, and the South Sea Islander
must be among the many as well as Germans, Frenchmen, and Englishmen.

In this coming socialization of industry we must guard against that same
tyranny of the majority that has marked democracy in the making of laws.
There must, for instance, persist in this future economics a certain
minimum of machine-like work and prompt obedience and submission. This
necessity is a simple corollary from the hard facts of the physical
world. It must be accepted with the comforting thought that its routine
need not demand twelve hours a day or even eight. With Work for All and
All at Work probably from three to six hours would suffice, and leave
abundant time for leisure, exercise, study, and avocations.

But what shall we say of work where spiritual values and social
distinctions enter? Who shall be Artists and who shall be Servants in
the world to come? Or shall we all be artists and all serve?




_The Second Coming_


Three bishops sat in San Francisco, New Orleans, and New York, peering
gloomily into three flickering fires, which cast and recast shuddering
shadows on book-lined walls. Three letters lay in their laps, which
said:

"And thou, Valdosta, in the land of Georgia, art not least among the
princes of America, for out of thee shall come a governor who shall rule
my people."

The white bishop of New York scowled and impatiently threw the letter
into the fire. "Valdosta?" he thought,--"That's where I go to the
governor's wedding of little Marguerite, my white flower,--" Then he
forgot the writing in his musing, but the paper flared red in the
fireplace.

"Valdosta?" said the black bishop of New Orleans, turning uneasily in
his chair. "I must go down there. Those colored folk are acting
strangely. I don't know where all this unrest and moving will lead to.
Then, there's poor Lucy--" And he threw the letter into the fire, but
eyed it suspiciously as it flamed green. "Stranger things than that have
happened," he said slowly, "'and ye shall hear of wars and rumors of
wars ... for nation shall rise against nation and kingdom against
kingdom.'"

In San Francisco the priest of Japan, abroad to study strange lands, sat
in his lacquer chair, with face like soft-yellow and wrinkled parchment.
Slowly he wrote in a great and golden book: "I have been strangely
bidden to the Val d' Osta, where one of those religious cults that swarm
here will welcome a prophet. I shall go and report to Kioto."

So in the dim waning of the day before Christmas three bishops met in
Valdosta and saw its mills and storehouses, its wide-throated and sandy
streets, in the mellow glow of a crimson sun. The governor glared
anxiously up the street as he helped the bishop of New York into his car
and welcomed him graciously.

"I am troubled," said the governor, "about the niggers. They are acting
queerly. I'm not certain but Fleming is back of it."

"Fleming?"

"Yes! He's running against me next term for governor; he's a firebrand;
wants niggers to vote and all that--pardon me a moment, there's a darky
I know--" and he hurried to the black bishop, who had just descended
from the "Jim-Crow" car, and clasped his hand cordially. They talked in
whispers. "Search diligently," said the governor in parting, "and bring
me word again." Then returning to his guest, "You will excuse me, won't
you?" he asked, "but I am sorely troubled! I never saw niggers act so.
They're leaving by the hundreds and those who stay are getting impudent!
They seem to be expecting something. What's the crowd, Jim?"

The chauffeur said that there was some sort of Chinese official in town
and everybody wanted to glimpse him. He drove around another way.

It all happened very suddenly. The bishop of New York, in full
canonicals for the early wedding, stepped out on the rear balcony of his
mansion, just as the dying sun lit crimson clouds of glory in the East
and burned the West.

"Fire!" yelled a wag in the surging crowd that was gathering to
celebrate a southern Christmas-eve; all laughed and ran.

The bishop of New York did not understand. He peered around. Was it that
dark, little house in the far backyard that flamed? Forgetful of his
robes he hurried down,--a brave, white figure in the sunset. He found
himself before an old, black, rickety stable. He could hear the mules
stamping within.

No. It was not fire. It was the sunset glowing through the cracks.
Behind the hut its glory rose toward God like flaming wings of cherubim.
He paused until he heard the faint wail of a child. Hastily he entered.
A white girl crouched before him, down by the very mules' feet, with a
baby in her arms,-a little mite of a baby that wailed weakly. Behind
mother and child stood a shadow. The bishop of New York turned to the
right, inquiringly, and saw a black man in bishop's robes that faintly
re-echoed his own. He turned away to the left and saw a golden Japanese
in golden garb. Then he heard the black man mutter behind him: "But He
was to come the second time in clouds of glory, with the nations
gathered around Him and angels--" at the word a shaft of glorious light
fell full upon the child, while without came the tramping of unnumbered
feet and the whirring of wings.

The bishop of New York bent quickly over the baby. It was black! He
stepped back with a gesture of disgust, hardly listening to and yet
hearing the black bishop, who spoke almost as if in apology:

"She's not really white; I know Lucy--you see, her mother worked for the
governor--" The white bishop turned on his heel and nearly trod on the
yellow priest, who knelt with bowed head before the pale mother and
offered incense and a gift of gold.

Out into the night rushed the bishop of New York. The wings of the
cherubim were folded black against the stars. As he hastened down the
front staircase the governor came rushing up the street steps.

"We are late!" he cried nervously. "The bride awaits!" He hurried the
bishop to the waiting limousine, asking him anxiously: "Did you hear
anything? Do you hear that noise? The crowd is growing strangely on the
streets and there seems to be a fire over toward the East. I never saw
so many people here--I fear violence--a mob--a lynching--I fear--hark!"

What was that which he, too, heard beneath the rhythm of unnumbered
feet? Deep in his heart a wonder grew. What was it? Ah, he knew! It was
music,--some strong and mighty chord. It rose higher as the
brilliantly-lighted church split the night, and swept radiantly toward
them. So high and clear that music flew, it seemed above, around, behind
them. The governor, ashen-faced, crouched in the car; but the bishop
said softly as the ecstasy pulsed in his heart:

"Such music, such wedding music! What choir is it?"




V

"THE SERVANT IN THE HOUSE"


The lady looked at me severely; I glanced away. I had addressed the
little audience at some length on the disfranchisement of my people in
society, politics, and industry and had studiously avoided the while her
cold, green eye. I finished and shook weary hands, while she lay in
wait. I knew what was coming and braced my soul.

"Do you know where I can get a good colored cook?" she asked. I
disclaimed all guilty concupiscence. She came nearer and spitefully
shook a finger in my face.

"Why--won't--Negroes--work!" she panted. "I have given money for years
to Hampton and Tuskegee and yet I can't get decent servants. They won't
try. They're lazy! They're unreliable! They're impudent and they leave
without notice. They all want to be lawyers and doctors and" (she spat
the word in venom) "ladies!"

"God forbid!" I answered solemnly, and then being of gentle birth, and
unminded to strike a defenseless female of uncertain years, I ran; I ran
home and wrote a chapter in my book and this is it.

       *       *       *       *       *

I speak and speak bitterly as a servant and a servant's son, for my
mother spent five or more years of her life as a menial; my father's
family escaped, although grandfather as a boat steward had to fight hard
to be a man and not a lackey. He fought and won. My mother's folk,
however, during my childhood, sat poised on that thin edge between the
farmer and the menial. The surrounding Irish had two chances, the
factory and the kitchen, and most of them took the factory, with all its
dirt and noise and low wage. The factory was closed to us. Our little
lands were too small to feed most of us. A few clung almost sullenly to
the old homes, low and red things crouching on a wide level; but the
children stirred restlessly and walked often to town and saw its
wonders. Slowly they dribbled off,--a waiter here, a cook there, help
for a few weeks in Mrs. Blank's kitchen when she had summer boarders.

Instinctively I hated such work from my birth. I loathed it and shrank
from it. Why? I could not have said. Had I been born in Carolina instead
of Massachusetts I should hardly have escaped the taint of "service."
Its temptations in wage and comfort would soon have answered my
scruples; and yet I am sure I would have fought long even in Carolina,
for I knew in my heart that thither lay Hell.

I mowed lawns on contract, did "chores" that left me my own man, sold
papers, and peddled tea--anything to escape the shadow of the awful
thing that lurked to grip my soul. Once, and once only, I felt the sting
of its talons. I was twenty and had graduated from Fisk with a
scholarship for Harvard; I needed, however, travel money and clothes and
a bit to live on until the scholarship was due. Fortson was a
fellow-student in winter and a waiter in summer. He proposed that the
Glee Club Quartet of Fisk spend the summer at the hotel in Minnesota
where he worked and that I go along as "Business Manager" to arrange for
engagements on the journey back. We were all eager, but we knew nothing
of table-waiting. "Never mind," said Fortson, "you can stand around the
dining-room during meals and carry out the big wooden trays of dirty
dishes. Thus you can pick up knowledge of waiting and earn good tips and
get free board." I listened askance, but I went.

I entered that broad and blatant hotel at Lake Minnetonka with distinct
forebodings. The flamboyant architecture, the great verandas, rich
furniture, and richer dresses awed us mightily. The long loft reserved
for us, with its clean little cots, was reassuring; the work was not
difficult,--but the meals! There were no meals. At first, before the
guests ate, a dirty table in the kitchen was hastily strewn with
uneatable scraps. We novices were the only ones who came to eat, while
the guests' dining-room, with its savors and sights, set our appetites
on edge! After a while even the pretense of meals for us was dropped. We
were sure we were going to starve when Dug, one of us, made a startling
discovery: the waiters stole their food and they stole the best. We
gulped and hesitated. Then we stole, too, (or, at least, they stole and
I shared) and we all fattened, for the dainties were marvelous. You
slipped a bit here and hid it there; you cut off extra portions and gave
false orders; you dashed off into darkness and hid in corners and ate
and ate! It was nasty business. I hated it. I was too cowardly to steal
much myself, and not coward enough to refuse what others stole.

Our work was easy, but insipid. We stood about and watched overdressed
people gorge. For the most part we were treated like furniture and were
supposed to act the wooden part. I watched the waiters even more than
the guests. I saw that it paid to amuse and to cringe. One particular
black man set me crazy. He was intelligent and deft, but one day I
caught sight of his face as he served a crowd of men; he was playing the
clown,--crouching, grinning, assuming a broad dialect when he usually
spoke good English--ah! it was a heartbreaking sight, and he made more
money than any waiter in the dining-room.

I did not mind the actual work or the kind of work, but it was the
dishonesty and deception, the flattery and cajolery, the unnatural
assumption that worker and diner had no common humanity. It was uncanny.
It was inherently and fundamentally wrong. I stood staring and thinking,
while the other boys hustled about. Then I noticed one fat hog, feeding
at a heavily gilded trough, who could not find his waiter. He beckoned
me. It was not his voice, for his mouth was too full. It was his way,
his air, his assumption. Thus Caesar ordered his legionaries or
Cleopatra her slaves. Dogs recognized the gesture. I did not. He may be
beckoning yet for all I know, for something froze within me. I did not
look his way again. Then and there I disowned menial service for me and
my people.

I would work my hands off for an honest wage, but for "tips" and
"hand-me-outs," never! Fortson was a pious, honest fellow, who regarded
"tips" as in the nature of things, being to the manner born; but the
hotel that summer in other respects rather astonished even him. He came
to us much flurried one night and got us to help him with a memorial to
the absentee proprietor, telling of the wild and gay doings of midnights
in the rooms and corridors among "tired" business men and their
prostitutes. We listened wide-eyed and eager and wrote the filth out
manfully. The proprietor did not thank Fortson. He did not even answer
the letter.

When I finally walked out of that hotel and out of menial service
forever, I felt as though, in a field of flowers, my nose had been held
unpleasantly long to the worms and manure at their roots.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Cursed be Canaan!" cried the Hebrew priests. "A servant of servants
shall he be unto his brethren." With what characteristic complacency did
the slaveholders assume that Canaanites were Negroes and their
"brethren" white? Are not Negroes servants? _Ergo_! Upon such spiritual
myths was the anachronism of American slavery built, and this was the
degradation that once made menial servants the aristocrats among colored
folk. House servants secured some decencies of food and clothing and
shelter; they could more easily reach their master's ear; their personal
abilities of character became known and bonds grew between slave and
master which strengthened from friendship to love, from mutual service
to mutual blood.

Naturally out of this the West Indian servant climbed out of slavery
into citizenship, for few West Indian masters--fewer Spanish or
Dutch--were callous enough to sell their own children into slavery. Not
so with English and Americans. With a harshness and indecency seldom
paralleled in the civilized world white masters on the mainland sold
their mulatto children, half-brothers and half-sisters, and their own
wives in all but name, into life-slavery by the hundreds and thousands.
They originated a special branch of slave-trading for this trade and the
white aristocrats of Virginia and the Carolinas made more money by this
business during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries than in any
other way.

The clang of the door of opportunity thus knelled in the ears of the
colored house servant whirled the whole face of Negro advancement as on
some great pivot. The movement was slow, but vast. When emancipation
came, before and after 1863, the house servant still held advantages. He
had whatever education the race possessed and his white father, no
longer able to sell him, often helped him with land and protection.
Notwithstanding this the lure of house service for the Negro was gone.
The path of salvation for the emancipated host of black folk lay no
longer through the kitchen door, with its wide hall and pillared veranda
and flowered yard beyond. It lay, as every Negro soon knew and knows, in
escape from menial serfdom.

In 1860, 98 per cent of the Negroes were servants and serfs. In 1880, 30
per cent were servants and 65 per cent were serfs. The percentage of
servants then rose slightly and fell again until 21 per cent were in
service in 1910 and, doubtless, much less than 20 per cent today. This
is the measure of our rise, but the Negro will not approach freedom
until this hateful badge of slavery and mediaevalism has been reduced to
less than 10 per cent.

Not only are less than a fifth of our workers servants today, but the
character of their service has been changed. The million menial workers
among us include 300,000 upper servants,--skilled men and women of
character, like hotel waiters, Pullman porters, janitors, and cooks,
who, had they been white, could have called on the great labor movement
to lift their work out of slavery, to standardize their hours, to define
their duties, and to substitute a living, regular wage for personal
largess in the shape of tips, old clothes, and cold leavings of food.
But the labor movement turned their backs on those black men when the
white world dinned in their ears. _Negroes are servants; servants are
Negroes._ They shut the door of escape to factory and trade in their
fellows' faces and battened down the hatches, lest the 300,000 should be
workers equal in pay and consideration with white men.

But, if the upper servants could not escape to modern, industrial
conditions, how much the more did they press down on the bodies and
souls of 700,000 washerwomen and household drudges,--ignorant,
unskilled offal of a millionaire industrial system. Their pay was the
lowest and their hours the longest of all workers. The personal
degradation of their work is so great that any white man of decency
would rather cut his daughter's throat than let her grow up to such a
destiny. There is throughout the world and in all races no greater
source of prostitution than this grade of menial service, and the Negro
race in America has largely escaped this destiny simply because its
innate decency leads black women to choose irregular and temporary
sexual relations with men they like rather than to sell themselves to
strangers. To such sexual morals is added (in the nature of
self-defense) that revolt against unjust labor conditions which
expresses itself in "soldiering," sullenness, petty pilfering,
unreliability, and fast and fruitless changes of masters.

Indeed, here among American Negroes we have exemplified the last and
worst refuge of industrial caste. Menial service is an anachronism,--the
refuse of mediaeval barbarism. Whey, then, does it linger? Why are we
silent about it? Why in the minds of so many decent and up-seeing folks
does the whole Negro problem resolve itself into the matter of their
getting a cook or a maid?

No one knows better than I the capabilities of a system of domestic
service at its best. I have seen children who were spiritual sons and
daughters of their masters, girls who were friends of their mistresses,
and old servants honored and revered. But in every such case the Servant
had transcended the Menial, the Service had been exalted above the Wage.
Now to accomplish this permanently and universally, calls for the same
revolution in household help as in factory help and public service.
While organized industry has been slowly making its help into
self-respecting, well-paid men, and while public service is beginning to
call for the highest types of educated and efficient thinkers, domestic
service lags behind and insists upon seeking to evolve the best types of
men from the worst conditions.

The cause of this perversity, to my mind, is twofold. First, the ancient
high estate of Service, now pitifully fallen, yet gasping for breath;
secondly, the present low estate of the outcasts of the world, peering
with blood-shot eyes at the gates of the industrial heaven.

The Master spoke no greater word than that which said: "Whosoever will
be great among you, let him be your servant!" What is greater than
Personal Service! Surely no social service, no wholesale helping of
masses of men can exist which does not find its effectiveness and beauty
in the personal aid of man to man. It is the purest and holiest of
duties. Some mighty glimmer of this truth survived in those who made the
First Gentlemen of the Bedchamber, the Keepers of the Robes, and the
Knights of the Bath, the highest nobility that hedged an anointed king.
Nor does it differ today in what the mother does for the child or the
daughter for the mother, in all the personal attentions in the
old-fashioned home; this is Service! Think of what Friend has meant, not
simply in spiritual sympathies, but in physical helpfulness. In the
world today what calls for more of love, sympathy, learning, sacrifice,
and long-suffering than the care of children, the preparation of food,
the cleansing and ordering of the home, personal attendance and
companionship, the care of bodies and their raiment--what greater, more
intimate, more holy Services are there than these?

And yet we are degrading these services and loathing them and scoffing
at them and spitting upon them, first, by turning them over to the
lowest and least competent and worst trained classes in the world, and
then by yelling like spoiled children if our babies are neglected, our
biscuits sodden, our homes dirty, and our baths unpoured. Let one
suggest that the only cure for such deeds is in the uplift of the doer
and our rage is even worse and less explicable. We will call them by
their first names, thus blaspheming a holy intimacy; we will confine
them to back doors; we will insist that their meals be no gracious
ceremony nor even a restful sprawl, but usually a hasty, heckled gulp
amid garbage; we exact, not a natural, but a purchased deference, and we
leave them naked to insult by our children and by our husbands.

I remember a girl,--how pretty she was, with the crimson flooding the
old ivory of her cheeks and her gracious plumpness! She had come to the
valley during the summer to "do housework." I met and walked home with
her, in the thrilling shadows, to an old village home I knew well; then
as I turned to leave I learned that she was there alone in that house
for a week-end with only one young white man to represent the family.
Oh, he was doubtless a "gentleman" and all that, but for the first time
in my life I saw what a snare the fowler was spreading at the feet of
the daughters of my people, baited by church and state.

Not alone is the hurt thus offered to the lowly,--Society and Science
suffer. The unit which we seek to make the center of society,--the
Home--is deprived of the help of scientific invention and suggestion. It
is only slowly and by the utmost effort that some small foothold has
been gained for the vacuum cleaner, the washing-machine, the power tool,
and the chemical reagent. In our frantic effort to preserve the last
vestiges of slavery and mediaevalism we not only set out faces against
such improvements, but we seek to use education and the power of the
state to train the servants who do not naturally appear.

Meantime the wild rush from house service, on the part of all who can
scramble or run, continues. The rules of the labor union are designed,
not simply to raise wages, but to guard against any likeness between
artisan and servant. There is no essential difference in ability and
training between a subway guard and a Pullman porter, but between their
union cards lies a whole world.

Yet we are silent. Menial service is not a "social problem." It is not
really discussed. There is no scientific program for its "reform." There
is but one panacea: Escape! Get yourselves and your sons and daughters
out of the shadow of this awful thing! Hire servants, but never be one.
Indeed, subtly but surely the ability to hire at least "a maid" is still
civilization's patent to respectability, while "a man" is the first word
of aristocracy.

All this is because we still consciously and unconsciously hold to the
"manure" theory of social organization. We believe that at the bottom of
organized human life there are necessary duties and services which no
real human being ought to be compelled to do. We push below this mudsill
the derelicts and half-men, whom we hate and despise, and seek to build
above it--Democracy! On such foundations is reared a Theory of
Exclusiveness, a feeling that the world progresses by a process of
excluding from the benefits of culture the majority of men, so that a
gifted minority may blossom. Through this door the modern democrat
arrives to the place where he is willing to allot two able-bodied men
and two fine horses to the task of helping one wizened beldam to take
the morning air.

Here the absurdity ends. Here all honest minds turn back and ask: Is
menial service permanent or necessary? Can we not transfer cooking from
the home to the scientific laboratory, along with the laundry? Cannot
machinery, in the hands of self-respecting and well-paid artisans, do
our cleaning, sewing, moving, and decorating? Cannot the training of
children become an even greater profession than the attending of the
sick? And cannot personal service and companionship be coupled with
friendship and love where it belongs and whence it can never be divorced
without degradation and pain?

In fine, can we not, black and white, rich and poor, look forward to a
world of Service without Servants?

A miracle! you say? True. And only to be performed by the Immortal
Child.




_Jesus Christ in Texas_


It was in Waco, Texas.

The convict guard laughed. "I don't know," he said, "I hadn't thought of
that." He hesitated and looked at the stranger curiously. In the solemn
twilight he got an impression of unusual height and soft, dark eyes.
"Curious sort of acquaintance for the colonel," he thought; then he
continued aloud: "But that nigger there is bad, a born thief, and ought
to be sent up for life; got ten years last time--"

Here the voice of the promoter, talking within, broke in; he was bending
over his figures, sitting by the colonel. He was slight, with a sharp
nose.

"The convicts," he said, "would cost us $96 a year and board. Well, we
can squeeze this so that it won't be over $125 apiece. Now if these
fellows are driven, they can build this line within twelve months. It
will be running by next April. Freights will fall fifty per cent. Why,
man, you'll be a millionaire in less than ten years."

The colonel started. He was a thick, short man, with a clean-shaven face
and a certain air of breeding about the lines of his countenance; the
word millionaire sounded well to his ears. He thought--he thought a
great deal; he almost heard the puff of the fearfully costly automobile
that was coming up the road, and he said:

"I suppose we might as well hire them."

"Of course," answered the promoter.

The voice of the tall stranger in the corner broke in here:

"It will be a good thing for them?" he said, half in question.

The colonel moved. "The guard makes strange friends," he thought to
himself. "What's this man doing here, anyway?" He looked at him, or
rather looked at his eyes, and then somehow he felt a warming toward
him. He said:

"Well, at least, it can't harm them; they're beyond that."

"It will do them good, then," said the stranger again.

The promoter shrugged his shoulders. "It will do us good," he said.

But the colonel shook his head impatiently. He felt a desire to justify
himself before those eyes, and he answered: "Yes, it will do them good;
or at any rate it won't make them any worse than they are." Then he
started to say something else, but here sure enough the sound of the
automobile breathing at the gate stopped him and they all arose.

"It is settled, then," said the promoter.

"Yes," said the colonel, turning toward the stranger again. "Are you
going into town?" he asked with the Southern courtesy of white men to
white men in a country town. The stranger said he was. "Then come along
in my machine. I want to talk with you about this."

They went out to the car. The stranger as he went turned again to look
back at the convict. He was a tall, powerfully built black fellow. His
face was sullen, with a low forehead, thick, hanging lips, and bitter
eyes. There was revolt written about his mouth despite the hang-dog
expression. He stood bending over his pile of stones, pounding
listlessly. Beside him stood a boy of twelve,--yellow, with a hunted,
crafty look. The convict raised his eyes and they met the eyes of the
stranger. The hammer fell from his hands.

The stranger turned slowly toward the automobile and the colonel
introduced him. He had not exactly caught his name, but he mumbled
something as he presented him to his wife and little girl, who were
waiting.

As they whirled away the colonel started to talk, but the stranger had
taken the little girl into his lap and together they conversed in low
tones all the way home.

In some way, they did not exactly know how, they got the impression that
the man was a teacher and, of course, he must be a foreigner. The long,
cloak-like coat told this. They rode in the twilight through the lighted
town and at last drew up before the colonel's mansion, with its
ghost-like pillars.

The lady in the back seat was thinking of the guests she had invited to
dinner and was wondering if she ought not to ask this man to stay. He
seemed cultured and she supposed he was some acquaintance of the
colonel's. It would be rather interesting to have him there, with the
judge's wife and daughter and the rector. She spoke almost before she
thought:

"You will enter and rest awhile?"

The colonel and the little girl insisted. For a moment the stranger
seemed about to refuse. He said he had some business for his father,
about town. Then for the child's sake he consented.

Up the steps they went and into the dark parlor where they sat and
talked a long time. It was a curious conversation. Afterwards they did
not remember exactly what was said and yet they all remembered a certain
strange satisfaction in that long, low talk.

Finally the nurse came for the reluctant child and the hostess
bethought herself:

"We will have a cup of tea; you will be dry and tired."

She rang and switched on a blaze of light. With one accord they all
looked at the stranger, for they had hardly seen him well in the
glooming twilight. The woman started in amazement and the colonel half
rose in anger. Why, the man was a mulatto, surely; even if he did not
own the Negro blood, their practised eyes knew it. He was tall and
straight and the coat looked like a Jewish gabardine. His hair hung in
close curls far down the sides of his face and his face was olive, even
yellow.

A peremptory order rose to the colonel's lips and froze there as he
caught the stranger's eyes. Those eyes,--where had he seen those eyes
before? He remembered them long years ago. The soft, tear-filled eyes of
a brown girl. He remembered many things, and his face grew drawn and
white. Those eyes kept burning into him, even when they were turned half
away toward the staircase, where the white figure of the child hovered
with her nurse and waved good-night. The lady sank into her chair and
thought: "What will the judge's wife say? How did the colonel come to
invite this man here? How shall we be rid of him?" She looked at the
colonel in reproachful consternation.

Just then the door opened and the old butler came in. He was an ancient
black man, with tufted white hair, and he held before him a large,
silver tray filled with a china tea service. The stranger rose slowly
and stretched forth his hands as if to bless the viands. The old man
paused in bewilderment, tottered, and then with sudden gladness in his
eyes dropped to his knees, and the tray crashed to the floor.

"My Lord and my God!" he whispered; but the woman screamed: "Mother's
china!"

The doorbell rang.

"Heavens! here is the dinner party!" exclaimed the lady. She turned
toward the door, but there in the hall, clad in her night clothes, was
the little girl. She had stolen down the stairs to see the stranger
again, and the nurse above was calling in vain. The woman felt
hysterical and scolded at the nurse, but the stranger had stretched out
his arms and with a glad cry the child nestled in them. They caught some
words about the "Kingdom of Heaven" as he slowly mounted the stairs with
his little, white burden.

The mother was glad of anything to get rid of the interloper, even for a
moment. The bell rang again and she hastened toward the door, which the
loitering black maid was just opening. She did not notice the shadow of
the stranger as he came slowly down the stairs and paused by the newel
post, dark and silent.

The judge's wife came in. She was an old woman, frilled and powdered
into a semblance of youth, and gorgeously gowned. She came forward,
smiling with extended hands, but when she was opposite the stranger,
somewhere a chill seemed to strike her and she shuddered and cried:

"What a draft!" as she drew a silken shawl about her and shook hands
cordially; she forgot to ask who the stranger was. The judge strode in
unseeing, thinking of a puzzling case of theft.

"Eh? What? Oh--er--yes,--good evening," he said, "good evening." Behind
them came a young woman in the glory of youth, and daintily silked,
beautiful in face and form, with diamonds around her fair neck. She came
in lightly, but stopped with a little gasp; then she laughed gaily and
said:

"Why, I beg your pardon. Was it not curious? I thought I saw there
behind your man"--she hesitated, but he must be a servant, she
argued--"the shadow of great, white wings. It was but the light on the
drapery. What a turn it gave me." And she smiled again. With her came a
tall, handsome, young naval officer. Hearing his lady refer to the
servant, he hardly looked at him, but held his gilded cap carelessly
toward him, and the stranger placed it carefully on the rack.

Last came the rector, a man of forty, and well-clothed. He started to
pass the stranger, stopped, and looked at him inquiringly.

"I beg your pardon," he said. "I beg your pardon,--I think I have met
you?"

The stranger made no answer, and the hostess nervously hurried the
guests on. But the rector lingered and looked perplexed.

"Surely, I know you. I have met you somewhere," he said, putting his
hand vaguely to his head. "You--you remember me, do you not?"

The stranger quietly swept his cloak aside, and to the hostess'
unspeakable relief passed out of the door.

"I never knew you," he said in low tones as he went.

The lady murmured some vain excuse about intruders, but the rector stood
with annoyance written on his face.

"I beg a thousand pardons," he said to the hostess absently. "It is a
great pleasure to be here,--somehow I thought I knew that man. I am sure
I knew him once."

The stranger had passed down the steps, and as he passed, the nurse,
lingering at the top of the staircase, flew down after him, caught his
cloak, trembled, hesitated, and then kneeled in the dust.

He touched her lightly with his hand and said: "Go, and sin no more!"

With a glad cry the maid left the house, with its open door, and turned
north, running. The stranger turned eastward into the night. As they
parted a long, low howl rose tremulously and reverberated through the
night. The colonel's wife within shuddered.

"The bloodhounds!" she said.

The rector answered carelessly:

"Another one of those convicts escaped, I suppose. Really, they need
severer measures." Then he stopped. He was trying to remember that
stranger's name.

The judge's wife looked about for the draft and arranged her shawl. The
girl glanced at the white drapery in the hall, but the young officer was
bending over her and the fires of life burned in her veins.

Howl after howl rose in the night, swelled, and died away. The stranger
strode rapidly along the highway and out into the deep forest. There he
paused and stood waiting, tall and still.

A mile up the road behind a man was running, tall and powerful and
black, with crime-stained face and convicts' stripes upon him, and
shackles on his legs. He ran and jumped, in little, short steps, and his
chains rang. He fell and rose again, while the howl of the hounds rang
louder behind him.

Into the forest he leapt and crept and jumped and ran, streaming with
sweat; seeing the tall form rise before him, he stopped suddenly,
dropped his hands in sullen impotence, and sank panting to the earth. A
greyhound shot out of the woods behind him, howled, whined, and fawned
before the stranger's feet. Hound after hound bayed, leapt, and lay
there; then silently, one by one, and with bowed heads, they crept
backward toward the town.

The stranger made a cup of his hands and gave the man water to drink,
bathed his hot head, and gently took the chains and irons from his feet.
By and by the convict stood up. Day was dawning above the treetops. He
looked into the stranger's face, and for a moment a gladness swept over
the stains of his face.

"Why, you are a nigger, too," he said.

Then the convict seemed anxious to justify himself.

"I never had no chance," he said furtively.

"Thou shalt not steal," said the stranger.

The man bridled.

"But how about them? Can they steal? Didn't they steal a whole year's
work, and then when I stole to keep from starving--" He glanced at the
stranger.

"No, I didn't steal just to keep from starving. I stole to be stealing.
I can't seem to keep from stealing. Seems like when I see things, I just
must--but, yes, I'll try!"

The convict looked down at his striped clothes, but the stranger had
taken off his long coat; he had put it around him and the stripes
disappeared.

In the opening morning the black man started toward the low, log
farmhouse in the distance, while the stranger stood watching him. There
was a new glory in the day. The black man's face cleared up, and the
farmer was glad to get him. All day the black man worked as he had never
worked before. The farmer gave him some cold food.

"You can sleep in the barn," he said, and turned away.

"How much do I git a day?" asked the black man.

The farmer scowled.

"Now see here," said he. "If you'll sign a contract for the season, I'll
give you ten dollars a month."

"I won't sign no contract," said the black man doggedly.

"Yes, you will," said the farmer, threateningly, "or I'll call the
convict guard." And he grinned.

The convict shrank and slouched to the barn. As night fell he looked out
and saw the farmer leave the place. Slowly he crept out and sneaked
toward the house. He looked through the kitchen door. No one was there,
but the supper was spread as if the mistress had laid it and gone out.
He ate ravenously. Then he looked into the front room and listened. He
could hear low voices on the porch. On the table lay a gold watch. He
gazed at it, and in a moment he was beside it,--his hands were on it!
Quickly he slipped out of the house and slouched toward the field. He
saw his employer coming along the highway. He fled back in tenor and
around to the front of the house, when suddenly he stopped. He felt the
great, dark eyes of the stranger and saw the same dark, cloak-like coat
where the stranger sat on the doorstep talking with the mistress of the
house. Slowly, guiltily, he turned back, entered the kitchen, and laid
the watch stealthily where he had found it; then he rushed wildly back
toward the stranger, with arms outstretched.

The woman had laid supper for her husband, and going down from the house
had walked out toward a neighbor's. She was gone but a little while, and
when she came back she started to see a dark figure on the doorsteps
under the tall, red oak. She thought it was the new Negro until he said
in a soft voice:

"Will you give me bread?"

Reassured at the voice of a white man, she answered quickly in her soft,
Southern tones:

"Why, certainly."

She was a little woman, and once had been pretty; but now her face was
drawn with work and care. She was nervous and always thinking, wishing,
wanting for something. She went in and got him some cornbread and a
glass of cool, rich buttermilk; then she came out and sat down beside
him. She began, quite unconsciously, to tell him about herself,--the
things she had done and had not done and the things she had wished for.
She told him of her husband and this new farm they were trying to buy.
She said it was hard to get niggers to work. She said they ought all to
be in the chain-gang and made to work. Even then some ran away. Only
yesterday one had escaped, and another the day before.

At last she gossiped of her neighbors, how good they were and how bad.

"And do you like them all?" asked the stranger.

She hesitated.

"Most of them," she said; and then, looking up into his face and putting
her hand into his, as though he were her father, she said:

"There are none I hate; no, none at all."

He looked away, holding her hand in his, and said dreamily:

"You love your neighbor as yourself?"

She hesitated.

"I try--" she began, and then looked the way he was looking; down under
the hill where lay a little, half-ruined cabin.

"They are niggers," she said briefly.

He looked at her. Suddenly a confusion came over her and she insisted,
she knew not why.

"But they are niggers!"

With a sudden impulse she arose and hurriedly lighted the lamp that
stood just within the door, and held it above her head. She saw his dark
face and curly hair. She shrieked in angry terror and rushed down the
path, and just as she rushed down, the black convict came running up
with hands outstretched. They met in mid-path, and before he could stop
he had run against her and she fell heavily to earth and lay white and
still. Her husband came rushing around the house with a cry and an oath.

"I knew it," he said. "It's that runaway nigger." He held the black man
struggling to the earth and raised his voice to a yell. Down the highway
came the convict guard, with hound and mob and gun. They paused across
the fields. The farmer motioned to them.

"He--attacked--my wife," he gasped.

The mob snarled and worked silently. Right to the limb of the red oak
they hoisted the struggling, writhing black man, while others lifted the
dazed woman. Right and left, as she tottered to the house, she searched
for the stranger with a yearning, but the stranger was gone. And she
told none of her guests.

"No--no, I want nothing," she insisted, until they left her, as they
thought, asleep. For a time she lay still, listening to the departure of
the mob. Then she rose. She shuddered as she heard the creaking of the
limb where the body hung. But resolutely she crawled to the window and
peered out into the moonlight; she saw the dead man writhe. He stretched
his arms out like a cross, looking upward. She gasped and clung to the
window sill. Behind the swaying body, and down where the little,
half-ruined cabin lay, a single flame flashed up amid the far-off shout
and cry of the mob. A fierce joy sobbed up through the terror in her
soul and then sank abashed as she watched the flame rise. Suddenly
whirling into one great crimson column it shot to the top of the sky and
threw great arms athwart the gloom until above the world and behind the
roped and swaying form below hung quivering and burning a great crimson
cross.

She hid her dizzy, aching head in an agony of tears, and dared not look,
for she knew. Her dry lips moved:

"Despised and rejected of men."

She knew, and the very horror of it lifted her dull and shrinking
eyelids. There, heaven-tall, earth-wide, hung the stranger on the
crimson cross, riven and blood-stained, with thorn-crowned head and
pierced hands. She stretched her arms and shrieked.

He did not hear. He did not see. His calm dark eyes, all sorrowful, were
fastened on the writhing, twisting body of the thief, and a voice came
out of the winds of the night, saying:

"This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise!"




VI

OF THE RULING OF MEN


The ruling of men is the effort to direct the individual actions of many
persons toward some end. This end theoretically should be the greatest
good of all, but no human group has ever reached this ideal because of
ignorance and selfishness. The simplest object would be rule for the
Pleasure of One, namely the Ruler; or of the Few--his favorites; or of
many--the Rich, the Privileged, the Powerful. Democratic movements
inside groups and nations are always taking place and they are the
efforts to increase the number of beneficiaries of the ruling. In 18th
century Europe, the effort became so broad and sweeping that an attempt
was made at universal expression and the philosophy of the movement said
that if All ruled they would rule for All and thus Universal Good was
sought through Universal Suffrage.

The unrealized difficulty of this program lay in the widespread
ignorance. The mass of men, even of the more intelligent men, not only
knew little about each other but less about the action of men in groups
and the technique of industry in general. They could only apply
universal suffrage, therefore, to the things they knew or knew
partially: they knew personal and menial service, individual
craftsmanship, agriculture and barter, taxes or the taking of private
property for public ends and the rent of land. With these matters then
they attempted to deal. Under the cry of "Freedom" they greatly relaxed
the grip of selfish interests by restricting menial service, securing
the right of property in handiwork and regulating public taxes;
distributing land ownership and freeing trade and barter.

While they were doing this against stubborn resistance, a whole new
organization of work suddenly appeared. The suddenness of this
"Industrial Revolution" of the 19th century was partly fortuitous--in
the case of Watt's teakettle--partly a natural development, as in the
matter of spinning, but largely the determination of powerful and
intelligent individuals to secure the benefits of privileged persons, as
in the case of foreign slave trade.

The result was on the one hand a vast and unexampled development of
industry. Life and civilization in the late 19th and early 20th century
were Industry in its whole conception, language, and accomplishment: the
object of life was to make goods. Now before this giant aspect of
things, the new democracy stood aghast and impotent. It could not rule
because it did not understand: an invincible kingdom of trade, business,
and commerce ruled the world, and before its threshold stood the Freedom
of 18th century philosophy warding the way. Some of the very ones who
were freed from the tyranny of the Middle Age became the tyrants of the
industrial age.

There came a reaction. Men sneered at "democracy" and politics, and
brought forth Fate and Philanthropy to rule the world--Fate which gave
divine right to rule to the Captains of Industry and their created
Millionaires; Philanthropy which organized vast schemes of relief to
stop at least the flow of blood in the vaster wounds which industry was
making.

It was at this time that the lowest laborers, who worked hardest, got
least and suffered most, began to mutter and rebel, and among these were
the American Negroes. Lions have no historians, and therefore lion hunts
are thrilling and satisfactory human reading. Negroes had no bards, and
therefore it has been widely told how American philanthropy freed the
slave. In truth the Negro revolted by armed rebellion, by sullen refusal
to work, by poison and murder, by running away to the North and Canada,
by giving point and powerful example to the agitation of the
abolitionists and by furnishing 200,000 soldiers and many times as many
civilian helpers in the Civil War. This war was not a war for Negro
freedom, but a duel between two industrial systems, one of which was
bound to fail because it was an anachronism, and the other bound to
succeed because of the Industrial Revolution.

When now the Negro was freed the Philanthropists sought to apply to his
situation the Philosophy of Democracy handed down from the 18th century.

There was a chance here to try democratic rule in a new way, that is,
against the new industrial oppression with a mass of workers who were
not yet in its control. With plenty of land widely distributed, staple
products like cotton, rice, and sugar cane, and a thorough system of
education, there was a unique chance to realize a new modern democracy
in industry in the southern United States which would point the way to
the world. This, too, if done by black folk, would have tended to a new
unity of human beings and an obliteration of human hatreds festering
along the color line.

Efforts were begun. The 14th and 15th amendments gave the right to vote
to white and black laborers, and they immediately established a public
school system and began to attack the land question. The United States
government was seriously considering the distribution of land and
capital--"40 acres and a mule"--and the price of cotton opened an easy
way to economic independence. Co-operative movements began on a large
scale.

But alas! Not only were the former slave-owners solidly arrayed against
this experiment, but the owners of the industrial North saw disaster in
any such beginnings of industrial democracy. The opposition based its
objections on the color line, and Reconstruction became in history a
great movement for the self-assertion of the white race against the
impudent ambition of degraded blacks, instead of, in truth, the rise of
a mass of black and white laborers.

The result was the disfranchisement of the blacks of the South and a
world-wide attempt to restrict democratic development to white races and
to distract them with race hatred against the darker races. This
program, however, although it undoubtedly helped raise the scale of
white labor, in much greater proportion put wealth and power in the
hands of the great European Captains of Industry and made modern
industrial imperialism possible.

This led to renewed efforts on the part of white European workers to
understand and apply their political power to its reform through
democratic control.

Whether known as Communism or Socialism or what not, these efforts are
neither new nor strange nor terrible, but world-old and seeking an
absolutely justifiable human ideal--the only ideal that can be sought:
the direction of individual action in industry so as to secure the
greatest good of all. Marxism was one method of accomplishing this, and
its panacea was the doing away with private property in machines and
materials. Two mighty attacks were made on this proposal. One was an
attack on the fundamental democratic foundation: modern European white
industry does not even theoretically seek the good of all, but simply of
all Europeans. This attack was virtually unanswered--indeed some
Socialists openly excluded Negroes and Asiatics from their scheme. From
this it was easy to drift into that form of syndicalism which asks
socialism for the skilled laborer only and leaves the common laborer in
his bonds.

This throws us back on fundamentals. It compels us again to examine the
roots of democracy.

Who may be excluded from a share in the ruling of men? Time and time
again the world has answered:

The Ignorant
The Inexperienced
The Guarded
The Unwilling

That is, we have assumed that only the intelligent should vote, or those
who know how to rule men, or those who are not under benevolent
guardianship, or those who ardently desire the right.

These restrictions are not arguments for the wide distribution of the
ballot--they are rather reasons for restriction addressed to the
self-interest of the present real rulers. We say easily, for instance,
"The ignorant ought not to vote." We would say, "No civilized state
should have citizens too ignorant to participate in government," and
this statement is but a step to the fact: that no state is civilized
which has citizens too ignorant to help rule it. Or, in other words,
education is not a prerequisite to political control--political control
is the cause of popular education.

Again, to make experience a qualification for the franchise is absurd:
it would stop the spread of democracy and make political power
hereditary, a prerequisite of a class, caste, race, or sex. It has of
course been soberly argued that only white folk or Englishmen, or men,
are really capable of exercising sovereign power in a modern state. The
statement proves too much: only yesterday it was Englishmen of high
descent, or men of "blood," or sovereigns "by divine right" who could
rule. Today the civilized world is being ruled by the descendants of
persons who a century ago were pronounced incapable of ever developing a
self-ruling people. In every modern state there must come to the polls
every generation, and indeed every year, men who are inexperienced in
the solutions of the political problems that confront them and who must
experiment in methods of ruling men. Thus and thus only will
civilization grow.

Again, what is this theory of benevolent guardianship for women, for the
masses, for Negroes--for "lesser breeds without the law"? It is simply
the old cry of privilege, the old assumption that there are those in the
world who know better what is best for others than those others know
themselves, and who can be trusted to do this best.

In fact no one knows himself but that self's own soul. The vast and
wonderful knowledge of this marvelous universe is locked in the bosoms
of its individual souls. To tap this mighty reservoir of experience,
knowledge, beauty, love, and deed we must appeal not to the few, not to
some souls, but to all. The narrower the appeal, the poorer the culture;
the wider the appeal the more magnificent are the possibilities.
Infinite is human nature. We make it finite by choking back the mass of
men, by attempting to speak for others, to interpret and act for them,
and we end by acting for ourselves and using the world as our private
property. If this were all, it were crime enough--but it is not all: by
our ignorance we make the creation of the greater world impossible; we
beat back a world built of the playing of dogs and laughter of children,
the song of Black Folk and worship of Yellow, the love of women and
strength of men, and try to express by a group of doddering ancients the
Will of the World.

There are people who insist upon regarding the franchise, not as a
necessity for the many, but as a privilege for the few. They say of
persons and classes: "They do not need the ballot." This is often said
of women. It is argued that everything which women with the ballot might
do for themselves can be done for them; that they have influence and
friends "at court," and that their enfranchisement would simply double
the number of ballots. So, too, we are told that American Negroes can
have done for them by other voters all that they could possibly do for
themselves with the ballot and much more because the white voters are
more intelligent.

Further than this, it is argued that many of the disfranchised people
recognize these facts. "Women do not want the ballot" has been a very
effective counter war-cry, so much so that many men have taken refuge in
the declaration: "When they want to vote, why, then--" So, too, we are
continually told that the "best" Negroes stay out of politics.

Such arguments show so curious a misapprehension of the foundation of
the argument for democracy that the argument must be continually
restated and emphasized. We must remember that if the theory of
democracy is correct, the right to vote is not merely a privilege, not
simply a method of meeting the needs of a particular group, and least of
all a matter of recognized want or desire. Democracy is a method of
realizing the broadest measure of justice to all human beings. The world
has, in the past, attempted various methods of attaining this end, most
of which can be summed up in three categories:

The method of the benevolent tyrant.
The method of the select few.
The method of the excluded groups.

The method of intrusting the government of a people to a strong ruler
has great advantages when the ruler combines strength with ability,
unselfish devotion to the public good, and knowledge of what that good
calls for. Such a combination is, however, rare and the selection of the
right ruler is very difficult. To leave the selection to force is to put
a premium on physical strength, chance, and intrigue; to make the
selection a matter of birth simply transfers the real power from
sovereign to minister. Inevitably the choice of rulers must fall on
electors.

Then comes the problem, who shall elect. The earlier answer was: a
select few, such as the wise, the best born, the able. Many people
assume that it was corruption that made such aristocracies fail. By no
means. The best and most effective aristocracy, like the best monarchy,
suffered from lack of knowledge. The rulers did not know or understand
the needs of the people and they could not find out, for in the last
analysis only the man himself, however humble, knows his own condition.
He may not know how to remedy it, he may not realize just what is the
matter; but he knows when something hurts and he alone knows how that
hurt feels. Or if sunk below feeling or comprehension or complaint, he
does not even know that he is hurt, God help his country, for it not
only lacks knowledge, but has destroyed the sources of knowledge.

So soon as a nation discovers that it holds in the heads and hearts of
its individual citizens the vast mine of knowledge, out of which it may
build a just government, then more and more it calls those citizens to
select their rulers and to judge the justice of their acts.

Even here, however, the temptation is to ask only for the wisdom of
citizens of a certain grade or those of recognized worth. Continually
some classes are tacitly or expressly excluded. Thus women have been
excluded from modern democracy because of the persistent theory of
female subjection and because it was argued that their husbands or other
male folks would look to their interests. Now, manifestly, most
husbands, fathers, and brothers will, so far as they know how or as they
realize women's needs, look after them. But remember the foundation of
the argument,--that in the last analysis only the sufferer knows his
sufferings and that no state can be strong which excludes from its
expressed wisdom the knowledge possessed by mothers, wives, and
daughters. We have but to view the unsatisfactory relations of the sexes
the world over and the problem of children to realize how desperately we
need this excluded wisdom.

The same arguments apply to other excluded groups: if a race, like the
Negro race, is excluded, then so far as that race is a part of the
economic and social organization of the land, the feeling and the
experience of that race are absolutely necessary to the realization of
the broadest justice for all citizens. Or if the "submerged tenth" be
excluded, then again, there is lost from the world an experience of
untold value, and they must be raised rapidly to a place where they can
speak for themselves. In the same way and for the same reason children
must be educated, insanity prevented, and only those put under the
guardianship of others who can in no way be trained to speak for
themselves.

The real argument for democracy is, then, that in the people we have
the source of that endless life and unbounded wisdom which the rulers of
men must have. A given people today may not be intelligent, but through
a democratic government that recognizes, not only the worth of the
individual to himself, but the worth of his feelings and experiences to
all, they can educate, not only the individual unit, but generation
after generation, until they accumulate vast stores of wisdom. Democracy
alone is the method of showing the whole experience of the race for the
benefit of the future and if democracy tries to exclude women or Negroes
or the poor or any class because of innate characteristics which do not
interfere with intelligence, then that democracy cripples itself and
belies its name.

From this point of view we can easily see the weakness and strength of
current criticism of extension of the ballot. It is the business of a
modern government to see to it, first, that the number of ignorant
within its bounds is reduced to the very smallest number. Again, it is
the duty of every such government to extend as quickly as possible the
number of persons of mature age who can vote. Such possible voters must
be regarded, not as sharers of a limited treasure, but as sources of new
national wisdom and strength.

The addition of the new wisdom, the new points of view, and the new
interests must, of course, be from time to time bewildering and
confusing. Today those who have a voice in the body politic have
expressed their wishes and sufferings. The result has been a smaller or
greater balancing of their conflicting interests. The appearance of new
interests and complaints means disarrangement and confusion to the older
equilibrium. It is, of course, the inevitable preliminary step to that
larger equilibrium in which the interests of no human soul will be
neglected. These interests will not, surely, be all fully realized, but
they will be recognized and given as full weight as the conflicting
interests will allow. The problem of government thereafter would be to
reduce the necessary conflict of human interests to the minimum.

From such a point of view one easily sees the strength of the demand for
the ballot on the part of certain disfranchised classes. When women ask
for the ballot, they are asking, not for a privilege, but for a
necessity. You may not see the necessity, you may easily argue that
women do not need to vote. Indeed, the women themselves in considerable
numbers may agree with you. Nevertheless, women do need the ballot. They
need it to right the balance of a world sadly awry because of its brutal
neglect of the rights of women and children. With the best will and
knowledge, no man can know women's wants as well as women themselves. To
disfranchise women is deliberately to turn from knowledge and grope in
ignorance.

So, too, with American Negroes: the South continually insists that a
benevolent guardianship of whites over blacks is the ideal thing. They
assume that white people not only know better what Negroes need than
Negroes themselves, but that they are anxious to supply these needs. As
a result they grope in ignorance and helplessness. They cannot
"understand" the Negro; they cannot protect him from cheating and
lynching; and, in general, instead of loving guardianship we see anarchy
and exploitation. If the Negro could speak for himself in the South
instead of being spoken for, if he could defend himself instead of
having to depend on the chance sympathy of white citizens, how much
healthier a growth of democracy the South would have.

So, too, with the darker races of the world. No federation of the world,
no true inter-nation--can exclude the black and brown and yellow races
from its counsels. They must equally and according to number act and be
heard at the world's council.

It is not, for a moment, to be assumed that enfranchising women will not
cost something. It will for many years confuse our politics. It may even
change the present status of family life. It will admit to the ballot
thousands of inexperienced persons, unable to vote intelligently. Above
all, it will interfere with some of the present prerogatives of men and
probably for some time to come annoy them considerably.

So, too, Negro enfranchisement meant reconstruction, with its theft and
bribery and incompetency as well as its public schools and enlightened,
social legislation. It would mean today that black men in the South
would have to be treated with consideration, have their wishes respected
and their manhood rights recognized. Every white Southerner, who wants
peons beneath him, who believes in hereditary menials and a privileged
aristocracy, or who hates certain races because of their
characteristics, would resent this.

Notwithstanding this, if America is ever to become a government built on
the broadest justice to every citizen, then every citizen must be
enfranchised. There may be temporary exclusions, until the ignorant and
their children are taught, or to avoid too sudden an influx of
inexperienced voters. But such exclusions can be but temporary if
justice is to prevail.

The principle of basing all government on the consent of the governed is
undenied and undeniable. Moreover, the method of modern democracy has
placed within reach of the modern state larger reserves of efficiency,
ability, and even genius than the ancient or mediaeval state dreamed of.
That this great work of the past can be carried further among all races
and nations no one can reasonably doubt.

Great as are our human differences and capabilities there is not the
slightest scientific reason for assuming that a given human being of any
race or sex cannot reach normal, human development if he is granted a
reasonable chance. This is, of course, denied. It is denied so volubly
and so frequently and with such positive conviction that the majority of
unthinking people seem to assume that most human beings are not human
and have no right to human treatment or human opportunity. All this goes
to prove that human beings are, and must be, woefully ignorant of each
other. It always startles us to find folks thinking like ourselves. We
do not really associate with each other, we associate with our ideas of
each other, and few people have either the ability or courage to
question their own ideas. None have more persistently and dogmatically
insisted upon the inherent inferiority of women than the men with whom
they come in closest contact. It is the husbands, brothers, and sons of
women whom it has been most difficult to induce to consider women
seriously or to acknowledge that women have rights which men are bound
to respect. So, too, it is those people who live in closest contact with
black folk who have most unhesitatingly asserted the utter impossibility
of living beside Negroes who are not industrial or political slaves or
social pariahs. All this proves that none are so blind as those nearest
the thing seen, while, on the other hand, the history of the world is
the history of the discovery of the common humanity of human beings
among steadily-increasing circles of men.

If the foundations of democracy are thus seen to be sound, how are we
going to make democracy effective where it now fails to
function--particularly in industry? The Marxists assert that industrial
democracy will automatically follow public ownership of machines and
materials. Their opponents object that nationalization of machines and
materials would not suffice because the mass of people do not understand
the industrial process. They do not know:

    What to do
    How to do it
    Who could do it best
            or
    How to apportion the resulting goods.

There can be no doubt but that monopoly of machines and materials is a
chief source of the power of industrial tyrants over the common worker
and that monopoly today is due as much to chance and cheating as to
thrift and intelligence. So far as it is due to chance and cheating, the
argument for public ownership of capital is incontrovertible even though
it involves some interference with long vested rights and inheritance.
This is being widely recognized in the whole civilized world. But how
about the accumulation of goods due to thrift and intelligence--would
democracy in industry interfere here to such an extent as to discourage
enterprise and make impossible the intelligent direction of the mighty
and intricate industrial process of modern times?

The knowledge of what to do in industry and how to do it in order to
attain the resulting goods rests in the hands and brains of the workers
and managers, and the judges of the result are the public. Consequently
it is not so much a question as to whether the world will admit
democratic control here as how can such control be long avoided when the
people once understand the fundamentals of industry. How can
civilization persist in letting one person or a group of persons, by
secret inherent power, determine what goods shall be made--whether bread
or champagne, overcoats or silk socks? Can so vast a power be kept from
the people?

But it may be opportunely asked: has our experience in electing public
officials led us to think that we could run railways, cotton mills, and
department stores by popular vote? The answer is clear: no, it has not,
and the reason has been lack of interest in politics and the tyranny of
the Majority. Politics have not touched the matters of daily life which
are nearest the interests of the people--namely, work and wages; or if
they have, they have touched it obscurely and indirectly. When voting
touches the vital, everyday interests of all, nominations and elections
will call for more intelligent activity. Consider too the vast unused
and misused power of public rewards to obtain ability and genius for the
service of the state. If millionaires can buy science and art, cannot
the Democratic state outbid them not only with money but with the vast
ideal of the common weal?

There still remains, however, the problem of the Majority.

What is the cause of the undoubted reaction and alarm that the citizens
of democracy continually feel? It is, I am sure, the failure to feel the
full significance of the change of rule from a privileged minority to
that of an omnipotent majority, and the assumption that mere majority
rule is the last word of government; that majorities have no
responsibilities, that they rule by the grace of God. Granted that
government should be based on the consent of the governed, does the
consent of a majority at any particular time adequately express the
consent of all? Has the minority, even though a small and unpopular and
unfashionable minority, no right to respectful consideration?

I remember that excellent little high school text book, "Nordhoff's
Politics," where I first read of government, saying this sentence at the
beginning of its most important chapter: "The first duty of a minority
is to become a majority." This is a statement which has its underlying
truth, but it also has its dangerous falsehood; viz., any minority which
cannot become a majority is not worthy of any consideration. But suppose
that the out-voted minority is necessarily always a minority? Women,
for instance, can seldom expect to be a majority; artists must always be
the few; ability is always rare, and black folk in this land are but a
tenth. Yet to tyrannize over such minorities, to browbeat and insult
them, to call that government a democracy which makes majority votes an
excuse for crushing ideas and individuality and self-development, is
manifestly a peculiarly dangerous perversion of the real democratic
ideal. It is right here, in its method and not in its object, that
democracy in America and elsewhere has so often failed. We have
attempted to enthrone any chance majority and make it rule by divine
right. We have kicked and cursed minorities as upstarts and usurpers
when their sole offense lay in not having ideas or hair like ours.
Efficiency, ability, and genius found often no abiding place in such a
soil as this. Small wonder that revolt has come and high-handed methods
are rife, of pretending that policies which we favor or persons that we
like have the anointment of a purely imaginary majority vote.

Are the methods of such a revolt wise, howsoever great the provocation
and evil may be? If the absolute monarchy of majorities is galling and
inefficient, is it any more inefficient than the absolute monarchy of
individuals or privileged classes have been found to be in the past? Is
the appeal from a numerous-minded despot to a smaller, privileged group
or to one man likely to remedy matters permanently? Shall we step
backward a thousand years because our present problem is baffling?

Surely not and surely, too, the remedy for absolutism lies in calling
these same minorities to council. As the king-in-council succeeded the
king by the grace of God, so in future democracies the toleration and
encouragement of minorities and the willingness to consider as "men" the
crankiest, humblest and poorest and blackest peoples, must be the real
key to the consent of the governed. Peoples and governments will not in
the future assume that because they have the brute power to enforce
momentarily dominant ideas, it is best to do so without thoughtful
conference with the ideas of smaller groups and individuals.
Proportionate representation in physical and spiritual form must come.

That this method is virtually coming in vogue we can see by the minority
groups of modern legislatures. Instead of the artificial attempts to
divide all possible ideas and plans between two great parties, modern
legislatures in advanced nations tend to develop smaller and smaller
minority groups, while government is carried on by temporary coalitions.
For a time we inveighed against this and sought to consider it a
perversion of the only possible method of practical democracy. Today we
are gradually coming to realize that government by temporary coalition
of small and diverse groups may easily become the most efficient method
of expressing the will of man and of setting the human soul free. The
only hindrance to the faster development of this government by allied
minorities is the fear of external war which is used again and again to
melt these living, human, thinking groups into inhuman, thoughtless, and
murdering machines.

The persons, then, who come forward in the dawn of the 20th century to
help in the ruling of men must come with the firm conviction that no
nation, race, or sex, has a monopoly of ability or ideas; that no human
group is so small as to deserve to be ignored as a part, and as an
integral and respected part, of the mass of men; that, above all, no
group of twelve million black folk, even though they are at the physical
mercy of a hundred million white majority, can be deprived of a voice in
their government and of the right to self-development without a blow at
the very foundations of all democracy and all human uplift; that the
very criticism aimed today at universal suffrage is in reality a demand
for power on the part of consciously efficient minorities,--but these
minorities face a fatal blunder when they assume that less democracy
will give them and their kind greater efficiency. However desperate the
temptation, no modern nation can shut the gates of opportunity in the
face of its women, its peasants, its laborers, or its socially damned.
How astounded the future world-citizen will be to know that as late as
1918 great and civilized nations were making desperate endeavor to
confine the development of ability and individuality to one sex,--that
is, to one-half of the nation; and he will probably learn that similar
effort to confine humanity to one race lasted a hundred years longer.

The doctrine of the divine right of majorities leads to almost humorous
insistence on a dead level of mediocrity. It demands that all people be
alike or that they be ostracized. At the same time its greatest
accusation against rebels is this same desire to be alike: the
suffragette is accused of wanting to be a man, the socialist is accused
of envy of the rich, and the black man is accused of wanting to be
white. That any one of these should simply want to be himself is to the
average worshiper of the majority inconceivable, and yet of all worlds,
may the good Lord deliver us from a world where everybody looks like his
neighbor and thinks like his neighbor and is like his neighbor.

The world has long since awakened to a realization of the evil which a
privileged few may exercise over the majority of a nation. So vividly
has this truth been brought home to us that we have lightly assumed that
a privileged and enfranchised majority cannot equally harm a nation.
Insane, wicked, and wasteful as the tyranny of the few over the many may
be, it is not more dangerous than the tyranny of the many over the few.
Brutal physical revolution can, and usually does, end the tyranny of the
few. But the spiritual losses from suppressed minorities may be vast and
fatal and yet all unknown and unrealized because idea and dream and
ability are paralyzed by brute force.

If, now, we have a democracy with no excluded groups, with all men and
women enfranchised, what is such a democracy to do? How will it
function? What will be its field of work?

The paradox which faces the civilized world today is that democratic
control is everywhere limited in its control of human interests. Mankind
is engaged in planting, forestry, and mining, preparing food and
shelter, making clothes and machines, transporting goods and folk,
disseminating news, distributing products, doing public and private
personal service, teaching, advancing science, and creating art.

In this intricate whirl of activities, the theory of government has been
hitherto to lay down only very general rules of conduct, marking the
limits of extreme anti-social acts, like fraud, theft, and murder.

The theory was that within these bounds was Freedom--the Liberty to
think and do and move as one wished. The real realm of freedom was found
in experience to be much narrower than this in one direction and much
broader in another. In matters of Truth and Faith and Beauty, the
Ancient Law was inexcusably strait and modern law unforgivably stupid.
It is here that the future and mighty fight for Freedom must and will be
made. Here in the heavens and on the mountaintops, the air of Freedom is
wide, almost limitless, for here, in the highest stretches, individual
freedom harms no man, and, therefore, no man has the right to limit it.

On the other hand, in the valleys of the hard, unyielding laws of matter
and the social necessities of time production, and human intercourse,
the limits on our freedom are stern and unbending if we would exist and
thrive. This does not say that everything here is governed by
incontrovertible "natural" law which needs no human decision as to raw
materials, machinery, prices, wages, news-dissemination, education of
children, etc.; but it does mean that decisions here must be limited by
brute facts and based on science and human wants.

Today the scientific and ethical boundaries of our industrial activities
are not in the hands of scientists, teachers, and thinkers; nor is the
intervening opportunity for decision left in the control of the public
whose welfare such decisions guide. On the contrary, the control of
industry is largely in the hands of a powerful few, who decide for their
own good and regardless of the good of others. The making of the rules
of Industry, then, is not in the hands of All, but in the hands of the
Few. The Few who govern industry envisage, not the wants of mankind, but
their own wants. They work quietly, often secretly, opposing Law, on the
one hand, as interfering with the "freedom of industry"; opposing, on
the other hand, free discussion and open determination of the rules of
work and wealth and wages, on the ground that harsh natural law brooks
no interference by Democracy.

These things today, then, are not matters of free discussion and
determination. They are strictly controlled. Who controls them? Who
makes these inner, but powerful, rules? Few people know. Others assert
and believe these rules are "natural"--a part of our inescapable
physical environment. Some of them doubtless are; but most of them are
just as clearly the dictates of self-interest laid down by the powerful
private persons who today control industry. Just here it is that modern
men demand that Democracy supplant skilfully concealed, but all too
evident, Monarchy.

In industry, monarchy and the aristocracy rule, and there are those who,
calling themselves democratic, believe that democracy can never enter
here. Industry, they maintain, is a matter of technical knowledge and
ability, and, therefore, is the eternal heritage of the few. They point
to the failure of attempts at democratic control in industry, just as we
used to point to Spanish-American governments, and they expose, not
simply the failures of Russian Soviets,--they fly to arms to prevent
that greatest experiment in industrial democracy which the world has yet
seen. These are the ones who say: We must control labor or civilization
will fail; we must control white labor in Europe and America; above all,
we must control yellow labor in Asia and black labor in Africa and the
South, else we shall have no tea, or rubber, or cotton. And yet,--and
yet is it so easy to give up the dream of democracy? Must industry rule
men or may men rule even industry? And unless men rule industry, can
they ever hope really to make laws or educate children or create beauty?

That the problem of the democratization of industry is tremendous, let
no man deny. We must spread that sympathy and intelligence which
tolerates the widest individual freedom despite the necessary public
control; we must learn to select for public office ability rather than
mere affability. We must stand ready to defer to knowledge and science
and judge by result rather than by method; and finally we must face the
fact that the final distribution of goods--the question of wages and
income is an ethical and not a mere mechanical problem and calls for
grave public human judgment and not secrecy and closed doors. All this
means time and development. It comes not complete by instant revolution
of a day, nor yet by the deferred evolution of a thousand years--it
comes daily, bit by bit and step by step, as men and women learn and
grow and as children are trained in Truth.

These steps are in many cases clear: the careful, steady increase of
public democratic ownership of industry, beginning with the simplest
type of public utilities and monopolies, and extending gradually as we
learn the way; the use of taxation to limit inheritance and to take the
unearned increment for public use beginning (but not ending) with a
"single tax" on monopolized land values; the training of the public in
business technique by co-operation in buying and selling, and in
industrial technique by the shop committee and manufacturing guild.

But beyond all this must come the Spirit--the Will to Human Brotherhood
of all Colors, Races, and Creeds; the Wanting of the Wants of All.
Perhaps the finest contribution of current Socialism to the world is
neither its light nor its dogma, but the idea back of its one mighty
word--Comrade!




The Call


In the Land of the Heavy Laden came once a dreary day. And the King, who
sat upon the Great White Throne, raised his eyes and saw afar off how
the hills around were hot with hostile feet and the sound of the mocking
of his enemies struck anxiously on the King's ears, for the King loved
his enemies. So the King lifted up his hand in the glittering silence
and spake softly, saying: "Call the Servants of the King." Then the
herald stepped before the armpost of the throne, and cried: "Thus saith
the High and Mighty One, who inhabiteth Eternity, whose name is
Holy,--the Servants of the King!"

Now, of the servants of the king there were a hundred and forty-four
thousand,--tried men and brave, brawny of arm and quick of wit; aye,
too, and women of wisdom and women marvelous in beauty and grace. And
yet on this drear day when the King called, their ears were thick with
the dust of the enemy, their eyes were blinded with the flashing of his
spears, and they hid their faces in dread silence and moved not, even at
the King's behest. So the herald called again. And the servants cowered
in very shame, but none came forth. But the third blast of the herald
struck upon a woman's heart, afar. And the woman straightway left her
baking and sweeping and the rattle of pans; and the woman straightway
left her chatting and gossiping and the sewing of garments, and the
woman stood before the King, saying: "The servant of thy servants, O
Lord."

Then the King smiled,--smiled wondrously, so that the setting sun burst
through the clouds, and the hearts of the King's men dried hard within
them. And the low-voiced King said, so low that even they that listened
heard not well: "Go, smite me mine enemies, that they cease to do evil
in my sight." And the woman quailed and trembled. Three times she lifted
her eyes unto the hills and saw the heathen whirling onward in their
rage. And seeing, she shrank--three times she shrank and crept to the
King's feet.

"O King," she cried, "I am but a woman."

And the King answered: "Go, then, Mother of Men."

And the woman said, "Nay, King, but I am still a maid." Whereat the King
cried: "O maid, made Man, thou shalt be Bride of God."

And yet the third time the woman shrank at the thunder in her ears, and
whispered: "Dear God, I am black!"

The King spake not, but swept the veiling of his face aside and lifted
up the light of his countenance upon her and lo! it was black.

So the woman went forth on the hills of God to do battle for the King,
on that drear day in the land of the Heavy Laden, when the heathen raged
and imagined a vain thing.




VII

THE DAMNATION OF WOMEN


I remember four women of my boyhood: my mother, cousin Inez, Emma, and
Ide Fuller. They represented the problem of the widow, the wife, the
maiden, and the outcast. They were, in color, brown and light-brown,
yellow with brown freckles, and white. They existed not for themselves,
but for men; they were named after the men to whom they were related and
not after the fashion of their own souls.

They were not beings, they were relations and these relations were
enfilmed with mystery and secrecy. We did not know the truth or believe
it when we heard it. Motherhood! What was it? We did not know or greatly
care. My mother and I were good chums. I liked her. After she was dead I
loved her with a fierce sense of personal loss.

Inez was a pretty, brown cousin who married. What was marriage? We did
not know, neither did she, poor thing! It came to mean for her a litter
of children, poverty, a drunken, cruel companion, sickness, and death.
Why?

There was no sweeter sight than Emma,--slim, straight, and dainty,
darkly flushed with the passion of youth; but her life was a wild, awful
struggle to crush her natural, fierce joy of love. She crushed it and
became a cold, calculating mockery.

Last there was that awful outcast of the town, the white woman, Ide
Fuller. What she was, we did not know. She stood to us as embodied filth
and wrong,--but whose filth, whose wrong?

Grown up I see the problem of these women transfused; I hear all about
me the unanswered call of youthful love, none the less glorious because
of its clean, honest, physical passion. Why unanswered? Because the
youth are too poor to marry or if they marry, too poor to have children.
They turn aside, then, in three directions: to marry for support, to
what men call shame, or to that which is more evil than nothing. It is
an unendurable paradox; it must be changed or the bases of culture will
totter and fall.

The world wants healthy babies and intelligent workers. Today we refuse
to allow the combination and force thousands of intelligent workers to
go childless at a horrible expenditure of moral force, or we damn them
if they break our idiotic conventions. Only at the sacrifice of
intelligence and the chance to do their best work can the majority of
modern women bear children. This is the damnation of women.

All womanhood is hampered today because the world on which it is
emerging is a world that tries to worship both virgins and mothers and
in the end despises motherhood and despoils virgins.

The future woman must have a life work and economic independence. She
must have knowledge. She must have the right of motherhood at her own
discretion. The present mincing horror at free womanhood must pass if we
are ever to be rid of the bestiality of free manhood; not by guarding
the weak in weakness do we gain strength, but by making weakness free
and strong.

The world must choose the free woman or the white wraith of the
prostitute. Today it wavers between the prostitute and the nun.
Civilization must show two things: the glory and beauty of creating life
and the need and duty of power and intelligence. This and this only will
make the perfect marriage of love and work.

    God is Love,
    Love is God;
    There is no God but Love
    And Work is His Prophet!

All this of woman,--but what of black women?

The world that wills to worship womankind studiously forgets its darker
sisters. They seem in a sense to typify that veiled Melancholy:

    "Whose saintly visage is too bright
    To hit the sense of human sight,
    And, therefore, to our weaker view
      O'er-laid with black."

Yet the world must heed these daughters of sorrow, from the primal black
All-Mother of men down through the ghostly throng of mighty womanhood,
who walked in the mysterious dawn of Asia and Africa; from Neith, the
primal mother of all, whose feet rest on hell, and whose almighty hands
uphold the heavens; all religion, from beauty to beast, lies on her
eager breasts; her body bears the stars, while her shoulders are
necklaced by the dragon; from black Neith down to

    "That starr'd Ethiop queen who strove
    To set her beauty's praise above
    The sea-nymphs,"

through dusky Cleopatras, dark Candaces, and darker, fiercer Zinghas, to
our own day and our own land,--in gentle Phillis; Harriet, the crude
Moses; the sybil, Sojourner Truth; and the martyr, Louise De Mortie.

The father and his worship is Asia; Europe is the precocious,
self-centered, forward-striving child; but the land of the mother is and
was Africa. In subtle and mysterious way, despite her curious history,
her slavery, polygamy, and toil, the spell of the African mother
pervades her land. Isis, the mother, is still titular goddess, in
thought if not in name, of the dark continent. Nor does this all seem to
be solely a survival of the historic matriarchate through which all
nations pass,--it appears to be more than this,--as if the great black
race in passing up the steps of human culture gave the world, not only
the Iron Age, the cultivation of the soil, and the domestication of
animals, but also, in peculiar emphasis, the mother-idea.

"No mother can love more tenderly and none is more tenderly loved than
the Negro mother," writes Schneider. Robin tells of the slave who bought
his mother's freedom instead of his own. Mungo Park writes: "Everywhere
in Africa, I have noticed that no greater affront can be offered a Negro
than insulting his mother. 'Strike me,' cries a Mandingo to his enemy,
'but revile not my mother!'" And the Krus and Fantis say the same. The
peoples on the Zambezi and the great lakes cry in sudden fear or joy:
"O, my mother!" And the Herero swears (endless oath) "By my mother's
tears!" "As the mist in the swamps," cries the Angola Negro, "so lives
the love of father and mother."

A student of the present Gold Coast life describes the work of the
village headman, and adds: "It is a difficult task that he is set to,
but in this matter he has all-powerful helpers in the female members of
the family, who will be either the aunts or the sisters or the cousins
or the nieces of the headman, and as their interests are identical with
his in every particular, the good women spontaneously train up their
children to implicit obedience to the headman, whose rule in the family
thus becomes a simple and an easy matter. 'The hand that rocks the
cradle rules the world.' What a power for good in the native state
system would the mothers of the Gold Coast and Ashanti become by
judicious training upon native lines!"

Schweinfurth declares of one tribe: "A bond between mother and child
which lasts for life is the measure of affection shown among the Dyoor"
and Ratzel adds:

"Agreeable to the natural relation the mother stands first among the
chief influences affecting the children. From the Zulus to the Waganda,
we find the mother the most influential counsellor at the court of
ferocious sovereigns, like Chaka or Mtesa; sometimes sisters take her
place. Thus even with chiefs who possess wives by hundreds the bonds of
blood are the strongest and that the woman, though often heavily
burdened, is in herself held in no small esteem among the Negroes is
clear from the numerous Negro queens, from the medicine women, from the
participation in public meetings permitted to women by many Negro
peoples."

As I remember through memories of others, backward among my own family,
it is the mother I ever recall,--the little, far-off mother of my
grandmothers, who sobbed her life away in song, longing for her lost
palm-trees and scented waters; the tall and bronzen grandmother, with
beaked nose and shrewish eyes, who loved and scolded her black and
laughing husband as he smoked lazily in his high oak chair; above all,
my own mother, with all her soft brownness,--the brown velvet of her
skin, the sorrowful black-brown of her eyes, and the tiny brown-capped
waves of her midnight hair as it lay new parted on her forehead. All the
way back in these dim distances it is mothers and mothers of mothers who
seem to count, while fathers are shadowy memories.

Upon this African mother-idea, the westward slave trade and American
slavery struck like doom. In the cruel exigencies of the traffic in men
and in the sudden, unprepared emancipation the great pendulum of social
equilibrium swung from a time, in 1800,--when America had but eight or
less black women to every ten black men,--all too swiftly to a day, in
1870,--when there were nearly eleven women to ten men in our Negro
population. This was but the outward numerical fact of social
dislocation; within lay polygamy, polyandry, concubinage, and moral
degradation. They fought against all this desperately, did these black
slaves in the West Indies, especially among the half-free artisans; they
set up their ancient household gods, and when Toussaint and Cristophe
founded their kingdom in Haiti, it was based on old African tribal ties
and beneath it was the mother-idea.

The crushing weight of slavery fell on black women. Under it there was
no legal marriage, no legal family, no legal control over children. To
be sure, custom and religion replaced here and there what the law
denied, yet one has but to read advertisements like the following to see
the hell beneath the system:

     "One hundred dollars reward will be given for my two fellows, Abram
     and Frank. Abram has a wife at Colonel Stewart's, in Liberty
     County, and a mother at Thunderbolt, and a sister in Savannah.

     "WILLIAM ROBERTS."


     "Fifty dollars reward--Ran away from the subscriber a Negro girl
     named Maria. She is of a copper color, between thirteen and
     fourteen years of age--bareheaded and barefooted. She is small for
     her age--very sprightly and very likely. She stated she was going
     to see her mother at Maysville.


     "SANFORD THOMSON."

     "Fifty dollars reward--Ran away from the subscriber his Negro man
     Pauladore, commonly called Paul. I understand General R.Y. Hayne
     has purchased his wife and children from H.L. Pinckney, Esq., and
     has them now on his plantation at Goose Creek, where, no doubt, the
     fellow is frequently lurking.

     "T. DAVIS."


The Presbyterian synod of Kentucky said to the churches under its care
in 1835: "Brothers and sisters, parents and children, husbands and
wives, are torn asunder and permitted to see each other no more. These
acts are daily occurring in the midst of us. The shrieks and agony often
witnessed on such occasions proclaim, with a trumpet tongue, the
iniquity of our system. There is not a neighborhood where these
heartrending scenes are not displayed. There is not a village or road
that does not behold the sad procession of manacled outcasts whose
mournful countenances tell that they are exiled by force from all that
their hearts hold dear."

A sister of a president of the United States declared: "We Southern
ladies are complimented with the names of wives, but we are only the
mistresses of seraglios."

Out of this, what sort of black women could be born into the world of
today? There are those who hasten to answer this query in scathing terms
and who say lightly and repeatedly that out of black slavery came
nothing decent in womanhood; that adultery and uncleanness were their
heritage and are their continued portion.

Fortunately so exaggerated a charge is humanly impossible of truth. The
half-million women of Negro descent who lived at the beginning of the
19th century had become the mothers of two and one-fourth million
daughters at the time of the Civil War and five million grand-daughters
in 1910. Can all these women be vile and the hunted race continue to
grow in wealth and character? Impossible. Yet to save from the past the
shreds and vestiges of self-respect has been a terrible task. I most
sincerely doubt if any other race of women could have brought its
fineness up through so devilish a fire.

Alexander Crummell once said of his sister in the blood: "In her
girlhood all the delicate tenderness of her sex has been rudely
outraged. In the field, in the rude cabin, in the press-room, in the
factory she was thrown into the companionship of coarse and ignorant
men. No chance was given her for delicate reserve or tender modesty.
From her childhood she was the doomed victim of the grossest passion.
All the virtues of her sex were utterly ignored. If the instinct of
chastity asserted itself, then she had to fight like a tiger for the
ownership and possession of her own person and ofttimes had to suffer
pain and lacerations for her virtuous self-assertion. When she reached
maturity, all the tender instincts of her womanhood were ruthlessly
violated. At the age of marriage,--always prematurely anticipated under
slavery--she was mated as the stock of the plantation were mated, not to
be the companion of a loved and chosen husband, but to be the breeder of
human cattle for the field or the auction block."

Down in such mire has the black motherhood of this race
struggled,--starving its own wailing offspring to nurse to the world
their swaggering masters; welding for its children chains which
affronted even the moral sense of an unmoral world. Many a man and woman
in the South have lived in wedlock as holy as Adam and Eve and brought
forth their brown and golden children, but because the darker woman was
helpless, her chivalrous and whiter mate could cast her off at his
pleasure and publicly sneer at the body he had privately blasphemed.

I shall forgive the white South much in its final judgment day: I shall
forgive its slavery, for slavery is a world-old habit; I shall forgive
its fighting for a well-lost cause, and for remembering that struggle
with tender tears; I shall forgive its so-called "pride of race," the
passion of its hot blood, and even its dear, old, laughable strutting
and posing; but one thing I shall never forgive, neither in this world
nor the world to come: its wanton and continued and persistent insulting
of the black womanhood which it sought and seeks to prostitute to its
lust. I cannot forget that it is such Southern gentlemen into whose
hands smug Northern hypocrites of today are seeking to place our women's
eternal destiny,--men who insist upon withholding from my mother and
wife and daughter those signs and appellations of courtesy and respect
which elsewhere he withholds only from bawds and courtesans.

The result of this history of insult and degradation has been both
fearful and glorious. It has birthed the haunting prostitute, the
brawler, and the beast of burden; but it has also given the world an
efficient womanhood, whose strength lies in its freedom and whose
chastity was won in the teeth of temptation and not in prison and
swaddling clothes.

To no modern race does its women mean so much as to the Negro nor come
so near to the fulfilment of its meaning. As one of our women writes:
"Only the black woman can say 'when and where I enter, in the quiet,
undisputed dignity of my womanhood, without violence and without suing
or special patronage, then and there the whole Negro race enters with
me.'"

They came first, in earlier days, like foam flashing on dark, silent
waters,--bits of stern, dark womanhood here and there tossed almost
carelessly aloft to the world's notice. First and naturally they assumed
the panoply of the ancient African mother of men, strong and black,
whose very nature beat back the wilderness of oppression and contempt.
Such a one was that cousin of my grandmother, whom western Massachusetts
remembers as "Mum Bett." Scarred for life by a blow received in defense
of a sister, she ran away to Great Barrington and was the first slave,
or one of the first, to be declared free under the Bill of Rights of
1780. The son of the judge who freed her, writes:

     "Even in her humble station, she had, when occasion required it, an
     air of command which conferred a degree of dignity and gave her an
     ascendancy over those of her rank, which is very unusual in persons
     of any rank or color. Her determined and resolute character, which
     enabled her to limit the ravages of Shay's mob, was manifested in
     her conduct and deportment during her whole life. She claimed no
     distinction, but it was yielded to her from her superior
     experience, energy, skill, and sagacity. Having known this woman as
     familiarly as I knew either of my parents, I cannot believe in the
     moral or physical inferiority of the race to which she belonged.
     The degradation of the African must have been otherwise caused than
     by natural inferiority."

It was such strong women that laid the foundations of the great Negro
church of today, with its five million members and ninety millions of
dollars in property. One of the early mothers of the church, Mary Still,
writes thus quaintly, in the forties:

     "When we were as castouts and spurned from the large churches,
     driven from our knees, pointed at by the proud, neglected by the
     careless, without a place of worship, Allen, faithful to the
     heavenly calling, came forward and laid the foundation of this
     connection. The women, like the women at the sepulcher, were early
     to aid in laying the foundation of the temple and in helping to
     carry up the noble structure and in the name of their God set up
     their banner; most of our aged mothers are gone from this to a
     better state of things. Yet some linger still on their staves,
     watching with intense interest the ark as it moves over the
     tempestuous waves of opposition and ignorance....

     "But the labors of these women stopped not here, for they knew well
     that they were subject to affliction and death. For the purpose of
     mutual aid, they banded themselves together in society capacity,
     that they might be better able to administer to each others'
     sufferings and to soften their own pillows. So we find the females
     in the early history of the church abounding in good works and in
     acts of true benevolence."

From such spiritual ancestry came two striking figures of
war-time,--Harriet Tubman and Sojourner Truth.

For eight or ten years previous to the breaking out of the Civil War,
Harriet Tubman was a constant attendant at anti-slavery conventions,
lectures, and other meetings; she was a black woman of medium size,
smiling countenance, with her upper front teeth gone, attired in coarse
but neat clothes, and carrying always an old-fashioned reticule at her
side. Usually as soon as she sat down she would drop off in sound sleep.

She was born a slave in Maryland, in 1820, bore the marks of the lash on
her flesh; and had been made partially deaf, and perhaps to some degree
mentally unbalanced by a blow on the head in childhood. Yet she was one
of the most important agents of the Underground Railroad and a leader of
fugitive slaves. She ran away in 1849 and went to Boston in 1854, where
she was welcomed into the homes of the leading abolitionists and where
every one listened with tense interest to her strange stories. She was
absolutely illiterate, with no knowledge of geography, and yet year
after year she penetrated the slave states and personally led North over
three hundred fugitives without losing a single one. A standing reward
of $10,000 was offered for her, but as she said: "The whites cannot
catch us, for I was born with the charm, and the Lord has given me the
power." She was one of John Brown's closest advisers and only severe
sickness prevented her presence at Harper's Ferry.

When the war cloud broke, she hastened to the front, flitting down along
her own mysterious paths, haunting the armies in the field, and serving
as guide and nurse and spy. She followed Sherman in his great march to
the sea and was with Grant at Petersburg, and always in the camps the
Union officers silently saluted her.

The other woman belonged to a different type,--a tall, gaunt, black,
unsmiling sybil, weighted with the woe of the world. She ran away from
slavery and giving up her own name took the name of Sojourner Truth. She
says: "I can remember when I was a little, young girl, how my old mammy
would sit out of doors in the evenings and look up at the stars and
groan, and I would say, 'Mammy, what makes you groan so?' And she would
say, 'I am groaning to think of my poor children; they do not know where
I be and I don't know where they be. I look up at the stars and they
look up at the stars!'"

Her determination was founded on unwavering faith in ultimate good.
Wendell Phillips says that he was once in Faneuil Hall, when Frederick
Douglass was one of the chief speakers. Douglass had been describing the
wrongs of the Negro race and as he proceeded he grew more and more
excited and finally ended by saying that they had no hope of justice
from the whites, no possible hope except in their own right arms. It
must come to blood! They must fight for themselves. Sojourner Truth was
sitting, tall and dark, on the very front seat facing the platform, and
in the hush of feeling when Douglass sat down she spoke out in her deep,
peculiar voice, heard all over the hall:

"Frederick, is God dead?"

Such strong, primitive types of Negro womanhood in America seem to some
to exhaust its capabilities. They know less of a not more worthy, but a
finer type of black woman wherein trembles all of that delicate sense of
beauty and striving for self-realization, which is as characteristic of
the Negro soul as is its quaint strength and sweet laughter. George
Washington wrote in grave and gentle courtesy to a Negro woman, in 1776,
that he would "be happy to see" at his headquarters at any time, a
person "to whom nature has been so liberal and beneficial in her
dispensations." This child, Phillis Wheatley, sang her trite and halting
strain to a world that wondered and could not produce her like. Measured
today her muse was slight and yet, feeling her striving spirit, we call
to her still in her own words:

     "Through thickest glooms look back, immortal shade."

Perhaps even higher than strength and art loom human sympathy and
sacrifice as characteristic of Negro womanhood. Long years ago, before
the Declaration of Independence, Kate Ferguson was born in New York.
Freed, widowed, and bereaved of her children before she was twenty, she
took the children of the streets of New York, white and black, to her
empty arms, taught them, found them homes, and with Dr. Mason of Murray
Street Church established the first modern Sunday School in Manhattan.

Sixty years later came Mary Shadd up out of Delaware. She was tall and
slim, of that ravishing dream-born beauty,--that twilight of the races
which we call mulatto. Well-educated, vivacious, with determination
shining from her sharp eyes, she threw herself singlehanded into the
great Canadian pilgrimage when thousands of hunted black men hurried
northward and crept beneath the protection of the lion's paw. She became
teacher, editor, and lecturer; tramping afoot through winter snows,
pushing without blot or blemish through crowd and turmoil to conventions
and meetings, and finally becoming recruiting agent for the United
States government in gathering Negro soldiers in the West.

After the war the sacrifice of Negro women for freedom and uplift is one
of the finest chapters in their history. Let one life typify all: Louise
De Mortie, a free-born Virginia girl, had lived most of her life in
Boston. Her high forehead, swelling lips, and dark eyes marked her for a
woman of feeling and intellect. She began a successful career as a
public reader. Then came the War and the Call. She went to the orphaned
colored children of New Orleans,--out of freedom into insult and
oppression and into the teeth of the yellow fever. She toiled and
dreamed. In 1887 she had raised money and built an orphan home and that
same year, in the thirty-fourth year of her young life, she died, saying
simply: "I belong to God."

As I look about me today in this veiled world of mine, despite the
noisier and more spectacular advance of my brothers, I instinctively
feel and know that it is the five million women of my race who really
count. Black women (and women whose grandmothers were black) are today
furnishing our teachers; they are the main pillars of those social
settlements which we call churches; and they have with small doubt
raised three-fourths of our church property. If we have today, as seems
likely, over a billion dollars of accumulated goods, who shall say how
much of it has been wrung from the hearts of servant girls and
washerwomen and women toilers in the fields? As makers of two million
homes these women are today seeking in marvelous ways to show forth our
strength and beauty and our conception of the truth.

In the United States in 1910 there were 4,931,882 women of Negro
descent; over twelve hundred thousand of these were children, another
million were girls and young women under twenty, and two and a
half-million were adults. As a mass these women were unlettered,--a
fourth of those from fifteen to twenty-five years of age were unable to
write. These women are passing through, not only a moral, but an
economic revolution. Their grandmothers married at twelve and fifteen,
but twenty-seven per cent of these women today who have passed fifteen
are still single.

Yet these black women toil and toil hard. There were in 1910 two and a
half million Negro homes in the United States. Out of these homes walked
daily to work two million women and girls over ten years of age,--over
half of the colored female population as against a fifth in the case of
white women. These, then, are a group of workers, fighting for their
daily bread like men; independent and approaching economic freedom! They
furnished a million farm laborers, 80,000 farmers, 22,000 teachers,
600,000 servants and washerwomen, and 50,000 in trades and
merchandizing.

The family group, however, which is the ideal of the culture with which
these folk have been born, is not based on the idea of an economically
independent working mother. Rather its ideal harks back to the sheltered
harem with the mother emerging at first as nurse and homemaker, while
the man remains the sole breadwinner. What is the inevitable result of
the clash of such ideals and such facts in the colored group? Broken
families.

Among native white women one in ten is separated from her husband by
death, divorce, or desertion. Among Negroes the ratio is one in seven.
Is the cause racial? No, it is economic, because there is the same high
ratio among the white foreign-born. The breaking up of the present
family is the result of modern working and sex conditions and it hits
the laborers with terrible force. The Negroes are put in a peculiarly
difficult position, because the wage of the male breadwinner is below
the standard, while the openings for colored women in certain lines of
domestic work, and now in industries, are many. Thus while toil holds
the father and brother in country and town at low wages, the sisters and
mothers are called to the city. As a result the Negro women outnumber
the men nine or ten to eight in many cities, making what Charlotte
Gilman bluntly calls "cheap women."

What shall we say to this new economic equality in a great laboring
class? Some people within and without the race deplore it. "Back to the
homes with the women," they cry, "and higher wage for the men." But how
impossible this is has been shown by war conditions. Cessation of
foreign migration has raised Negro men's wages, to be sure--but it has
not only raised Negro women's wages, it has opened to them a score of
new avenues of earning a living. Indeed, here, in microcosm and with
differences emphasizing sex equality, is the industrial history of labor
in the 19th and 20th centuries. We cannot abolish the new economic
freedom of women. We cannot imprison women again in a home or require
them all on pain of death to be nurses and housekeepers.

What is today the message of these black women to America and to the
world? The uplift of women is, next to the problem of the color line and
the peace movement, our greatest modern cause. When, now, two of these
movements--woman and color--combine in one, the combination has deep
meaning.

In other years women's way was clear: to be beautiful, to be petted, to
bear children. Such has been their theoretic destiny and if perchance
they have been ugly, hurt, and barren, that has been forgotten with
studied silence. In partial compensation for this narrowed destiny the
white world has lavished its politeness on its womankind,--its chivalry
and bows, its uncoverings and courtesies--all the accumulated homage
disused for courts and kings and craving exercise. The revolt of white
women against this preordained destiny has in these latter days reached
splendid proportions, but it is the revolt of an aristocracy of brains
and ability,--the middle class and rank and file still plod on in the
appointed path, paid by the homage, the almost mocking homage, of men.

From black women of America, however, (and from some others, too, but
chiefly from black women and their daughters' daughters) this gauze has
been withheld and without semblance of such apology they have been
frankly trodden under the feet of men. They are and have been objected
to, apparently for reasons peculiarly exasperating to reasoning human
beings. When in this world a man comes forward with a thought, a deed, a
vision, we ask not, how does he look,--but what is his message? It is of
but passing interest whether or not the messenger is beautiful or
ugly,--the _message_ is the thing. This, which is axiomatic among men,
has been in past ages but partially true if the messenger was a woman.
The world still wants to ask that a woman primarily be pretty and if she
is not, the mob pouts and asks querulously, "What else are women for?"
Beauty "is its own excuse for being," but there are other excuses, as
most men know, and when the white world objects to black women because
it does not consider them beautiful, the black world of right asks two
questions: "What is beauty?" and, "Suppose you think them ugly, what
then? If ugliness and unconventionality and eccentricity of face and
deed do not hinder men from doing the world's work and reaping the
world's reward, why should it hinder women?"

Other things being equal, all of us, black and white, would prefer to be
beautiful in face and form and suitably clothed; but most of us are not
so, and one of the mightiest revolts of the century is against the
devilish decree that no woman is a woman who is not by present standards
a beautiful woman. This decree the black women of America have in large
measure escaped from the first. Not being expected to be merely
ornamental, they have girded themselves for work, instead of adorning
their bodies only for play. Their sturdier minds have concluded that if
a woman be clean, healthy, and educated, she is as pleasing as God wills
and far more useful than most of her sisters. If in addition to this she
is pink and white and straight-haired, and some of her fellow-men prefer
this, well and good; but if she is black or brown and crowned in curled
mists (and this to us is the most beautiful thing on earth), this is
surely the flimsiest excuse for spiritual incarceration or banishment.

The very attempt to do this in the case of Negro Americans has strangely
over-reached itself. By so much as the defective eyesight of the white
world rejects black women as beauties, by so much the more it needs them
as human beings,--an enviable alternative, as many a white woman knows.
Consequently, for black women alone, as a group, "handsome is that
handsome does" and they are asked to be no more beautiful than God made
them, but they are asked to be efficient, to be strong, fertile,
muscled, and able to work. If they marry, they must as independent
workers be able to help support their children, for their men are paid
on a scale which makes sole support of the family often impossible.

On the whole, colored working women are paid as well as white working
women for similar work, save in some higher grades, while colored men
get from one-fourth to three-fourths less than white men. The result is
curious and three-fold: the economic independence of black women is
increased, the breaking up of Negro families must be more frequent, and
the number of illegitimate children is decreased more slowly among them
than other evidences of culture are increased, just as was once true in
Scotland and Bavaria.

What does this mean? It forecasts a mighty dilemma which the whole world
of civilization, despite its will, must one time frankly face: the
unhusbanded mother or the childless wife. God send us a world with
woman's freedom and married motherhood inextricably wed, but until He
sends it, I see more of future promise in the betrayed girl-mothers of
the black belt than in the childless wives of the white North, and I
have more respect for the colored servant who yields to her frank
longing for motherhood than for her white sister who offers up children
for clothes. Out of a sex freedom that today makes us shudder will come
in time a day when we will no longer pay men for work they do not do,
for the sake of their harem; we will pay women what they earn and insist
on their working and earning it; we will allow those persons to vote who
know enough to vote, whether they be black or female, white or male; and
we will ward race suicide, not by further burdening the over-burdened,
but by honoring motherhood, even when the sneaking father shirks his
duty.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Wait till the lady passes," said a Nashville white boy.

"She's no lady; she's a nigger," answered another.

So some few women are born free, and some amid insult and scarlet
letters achieve freedom; but our women in black had freedom thrust
contemptuously upon them. With that freedom they are buying an
untrammeled independence and dear as is the price they pay for it, it
will in the end be worth every taunt and groan. Today the dreams of the
mothers are coming true. We have still our poverty and degradation, our
lewdness and our cruel toil; but we have, too, a vast group of women of
Negro blood who for strength of character, cleanness of soul, and
unselfish devotion of purpose, is today easily the peer of any group of
women in the civilized world. And more than that, in the great rank and
file of our five million women we have the up-working of new
revolutionary ideals, which must in time have vast influence on the
thought and action of this land.

For this, their promise, and for their hard past, I honor the women of
my race. Their beauty,--their dark and mysterious beauty of midnight
eyes, crumpled hair, and soft, full-featured faces--is perhaps more to
me than to you, because I was born to its warm and subtle spell; but
their worth is yours as well as mine. No other women on earth could
have emerged from the hell of force and temptation which once engulfed
and still surrounds black women in America with half the modesty and
womanliness that they retain. I have always felt like bowing myself
before them in all abasement, searching to bring some tribute to these
long-suffering victims, these burdened sisters of mine, whom the world,
the wise, white world, loves to affront and ridicule and wantonly to
insult. I have known the women of many lands and nations,--I have known
and seen and lived beside them, but none have I known more sweetly
feminine, more unswervingly loyal, more desperately earnest, and more
instinctively pure in body and in soul than the daughters of my black
mothers. This, then,--a little thing--to their memory and inspiration.




_Children of the Moon_


    I am dead;
    Yet somehow, somewhere,
    In Time's weird contradiction, I
    May tell of that dread deed, wherewith
    I brought to Children of the Moon
    Freedom and vast salvation.

    I was a woman born,
    And trod the streaming street,
    That ebbs and flows from Harlem's hills,
    Through caves and caÃ±ons limned in light,
    Down to the twisting sea.

    That night of nights,
    I stood alone and at the End,
    Until the sudden highway to the moon,
    Golden in splendor,
    Became too real to doubt.

    Dimly I set foot upon the air,
    I fled, I flew, through the thrills of light,
    With all about, above, below, the whirring
    Of almighty wings.

    I found a twilight land,
    Where, hardly hid, the sun
    Sent softly-saddened rays of
    Red and brown to burn the iron soil
    And bathe the snow-white peaks
    In mighty splendor.

    Black were the men,
    Hard-haired and silent-slow,
    Moving as shadows,
    Bending with face of fear to earthward;
    And women there were none.

    "Woman, woman, woman!"
    I cried in mounting terror.
    "Woman and Child!"
    And the cry sang back
    Through heaven, with the
    Whirring of almighty wings.

    Wings, wings, endless wings,--
    Heaven and earth are wings;
    Wings that flutter, furl, and fold,
    Always folding and unfolding,
    Ever folding yet again;
    Wings, veiling some vast
    And veilÃ©d face,
    In blazing blackness,
    Behind the folding and unfolding,
    The rolling and unrolling of
    Almighty wings!

    I saw the black men huddle,
    Fumed in fear, falling face downward;
    Vainly I clutched and clawed,
    Dumbly they cringed and cowered,
    Moaning in mournful monotone:

      O Freedom, O Freedom,
      O Freedom over me;
      Before I'll be a slave,
      I'll be buried in my grave,
      And go home to my God,
            And be free.

    It was angel-music
    From the dead,
    And ever, as they sang,
    Some wingÃ©d thing of wings, filling all heaven,
    Folding and unfolding, and folding yet again,

    Tore out their blood and entrails,
    'Til I screamed in utter terror;
    And a silence came--
    A silence and the wailing of a babe.

    Then, at last, I saw and shamed;
    I knew how these dumb, dark, and dusky things
    Had given blood and life,
    To fend the caves of underground,
    The great black caves of utter night,
    Where earth lay full of mothers
    And their babes.

    Little children sobbing in darkness,
    Little children crying in silent pain,
    Little mothers rocking and groping and struggling,
    Digging and delving and groveling,
    Amid the dying-dead and dead-in-life
    And drip and dripping of warm, wet blood,
    Far, far beneath the wings,--
    The folding and unfolding of almighty wings.

    I bent with tears and pitying hands,
    Above these dusky star-eyed children,--
    Crinkly-haired, with sweet-sad baby voices,
    Pleading low for light and love and living--
    And I crooned:

    "Little children weeping there,
    God shall find your faces fair;
    Guerdon for your deep distress,
    He shall send His tenderness;
    For the tripping of your feet
    Make a mystic music sweet
    In the darkness of your hair;
    Light and laughter in the air--
    Little children weeping there,
    God shall find your faces fair!"

    I strode above the stricken, bleeding men,
    The rampart 'ranged against the skies,
    And shouted:
    "Up, I say, build and slay;
    Fight face foremost, force a way,
    Unloose, unfetter, and unbind;
    Be men and free!"

    Dumbly they shrank,
    Muttering they pointed toward that peak,
    Than vastness vaster,
    Whereon a darkness brooded,
    "Who shall look and live," they sighed;
    And I sensed
    The folding and unfolding of almighty wings.

    Yet did we build of iron, bricks, and blood;
    We built a day, a year, a thousand years,
    Blood was the mortar,--blood and tears,
    And, ah, the Thing, the Thing of wings,
    The wingÃ©d, folding Wing of Things
    Did furnish much mad mortar
    For that tower.

    Slow and ever slower rose the towering task,
    And with it rose the sun,
    Until at last on one wild day,
    Wind-whirled, cloud-swept and terrible
    I stood beneath the burning shadow
    Of the peak,
    Beneath the whirring of almighty wings,
    While downward from my feet
    Streamed the long line of dusky faces
    And the wail of little children sobbing under earth.

    Alone, aloft,
    I saw through firmaments on high
    The drama of Almighty God,
    With all its flaming suns and stars.
    "Freedom!" I cried.
    "Freedom!" cried heaven, earth, and stars;
    And a Voice near-far,
    Amid the folding and unfolding of almighty wings,
    Answered, "I am Freedom--
    Who sees my face is free--
    He and his."

    I dared not look;
    Downward I glanced on deep-bowed heads and closed eyes,
    Outward I gazed on flecked and flaming blue--
    But ever onward, upward flew
    The sobbing of small voices,--
    Down, down, far down into the night.

    Slowly I lifted livid limbs aloft;
    Upward I strove: the face! the face!
    Onward I reeled: the face! the face!
    To beauty wonderful as sudden death,
    Or horror horrible as endless life--
    Up! Up! the blood-built way;
    (Shadow grow vaster!
    Terror come faster!)
    Up! Up! to the blazing blackness
    Of one veilÃ©d face.

    And endless folding and unfolding,
    Rolling and unrolling of almighty wings.
    The last step stood!
    The last dim cry of pain
    Fluttered across the stars,
    And then--
    Wings, wings, triumphant wings,
    Lifting and lowering, waxing and waning,
    Swinging and swaying, twirling and whirling,
    Whispering and screaming, streaming and gleaming,
    Spreading and sweeping and shading and flaming--
    Wings, wings, eternal wings,
    'Til the hot, red blood,
    Flood fleeing flood,
    Thundered through heaven and mine ears,
    While all across a purple sky,
    The last vast pinion.
    Trembled to unfold.

    I rose upon the Mountain of the Moon,--
    I felt the blazing glory of the Sun;
    I heard the Song of Children crying, "Free!"
    I saw the face of Freedom--
    And I died.





VIII

THE IMMORTAL CHILD


If a man die shall he live again? We do not know. But this we do know,
that our children's children live forever and grow and develop toward
perfection as they are trained. All human problems, then, center in the
Immortal Child and his education is the problem of problems. And first
for illustration of what I would say may I not take for example, out of
many millions, the life of one dark child.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is now nineteen years since I first saw Coleridge-Taylor. We were in
London in some somber hall where there were many meeting, men and women
called chiefly to the beautiful World's Fair at Paris; and then a few
slipping over to London to meet Pan-Africa. We were there from Cape
Colony and Liberia, from Haiti and the States, and from the Islands of
the Sea. I remember the stiff, young officer who came with credentials
from Menelik of Abyssinia; I remember the bitter, black American who
whispered how an army of the Soudan might some day cross the Alps; I
remember Englishmen, like the Colensos, who sat and counseled with us;
but above all, I remember Coleridge-Taylor.

He was a little man and nervous, with dark-golden face and hair that
bushed and strayed. His fingers were always nervously seeking hidden
keys and he was quick with enthusiasm,--instinct with life. His bride of
a year or more,--dark, too, in her whiter way,--was of the calm and
quiet type. Her soft contralto voice thrilled us often as she sang,
while her silences were full of understanding.

Several times we met in public gatherings and then they bade me to their
home,--a nest of a cottage, with gate and garden, hidden in London's
endless rings of suburbs. I dimly recall through these years a room in
cozy disorder, strewn with music--music on the floor and music on the
chairs, music in the air as the master rushed to the piano now and
again to make some memory melodious--some allusion real.

And then at last, for it was the last, I saw Coleridge-Taylor in a
mighty throng of people crowding the Crystal Palace. We came in facing
the stage and scarcely dared look around. On the stage were a full
orchestra, a chorus of eight hundred voices, and some of the world's
famous soloists. He left his wife sitting beside me, and she was very
silent as he went forward to lift the conductor's baton. It was one of
the earliest renditions of "Hiawatha's Wedding Feast." We sat at rapt
attention and when the last, weird music died, the great chorus and
orchestra rose as a man to acclaim the master; he turned toward the
audience and then we turning for the first time saw that sea of faces
behind,--the misty thousands whose voices rose to one strong shout of
joy! It was a moment such as one does not often live. It seemed, and
was, prophetic.

This young man who stepped forth as one of the most notable of modern
English composers had a simple and uneventful career. His father was a
black surgeon of Sierra Leone who came to London for study. While there
he met an English girl and this son was born, in London, in 1875.

Then came a series of chances. His father failed to succeed and
disappeared back to Africa leaving the support of the child to the poor
working mother. The child showed evidences of musical talent and a
friendly workingman gave him a little violin. A musician glancing from
his window saw a little dark boy playing marbles on the street with a
tiny violin in one hand; he gave him lessons. He happened to gain
entrance into a charity school with a master of understanding mind who
recognized genius when he saw it; and finally his beautiful child's
treble brought him to the notice of the choirmaster of St. George's,
Croyden.

So by happy accident his way was clear. Within his soul was no
hesitation. He was one of those fortunate beings who are not called to
_Wander-Jahre_, but are born with sails set and seas charted. Already
the baby of four little years was a musician, and as choir-boy and
violinist he walked unhesitatingly and surely to his life work. He was
graduated with honors from the Royal Academy of Music in 1894, and
married soon after the daughter of one of his professors. Then his life
began, and whatever it lacked of physical adventure in the conventional
round of a modern world-city, it more than gained in the almost
tempestuous outpouring of his spiritual nature. Life to him was neither
meat nor drink,--it was creative flame; ideas, plans, melodies glowed
within him. To create, to do, to accomplish; to know the white glory of
mighty midnights and the pale Amen of dawns was his day of days. Songs,
pianoforte and violin pieces, trios and quintets for strings, incidental
music, symphony, orchestral, and choral works rushed from his fingers.
Nor were they laboriously contrived or light, thin things made to meet
sudden popularity. Rather they were the flaming bits that must be said
and sung,--that could not wait the slower birth of years, so hurried to
the world as though their young creator knew that God gave him but a
day. His whole active life was scarcely more than a decade and a half,
and yet in that time, without wealth, friends, or influence, in the face
of perhaps the most critical and skeptical and least imaginative
civilization of the modern world, he wrote his name so high as a
creative artist that it cannot soon be forgotten.

And this was but one side of the man. On the other was the
sweet-tempered, sympathetic comrade, always willing to help, never
knowing how to refuse, generous with every nerve and fiber of his being.
Think of a young musician, father of a family, who at the time of his
death held positions as Associate of the Royal College of Music,
Professor in Trinity College and Crystal Palace, Conductor of the Handel
Choral Society and the Rochester Choral Society, Principal of the
Guildhall School of Music, where he had charge of the choral choir, the
orchestra, and the opera. He was repeatedly the leader of music
festivals all over Great Britain and a judge of contests. And with all
this his house was open in cheering hospitality to friends and his hand
ever ready with sympathy and help.

When such a man dies, it must bring pause to a reasoning world. We may
call his death-sickness pneumonia, but we all know that it was sheer
overwork,--the using of a delicately-tuned instrument too commonly and
continuously and carelessly to let it last its normal life. We may well
talk of the waste of wood and water, of food and fire, but the real and
unforgivable waste of modern civilization is the waste of ability and
genius,--the killing of useful, indispensable men who have no right to
die; who deserve, not for themselves, but for the world, leisure,
freedom from distraction, expert medical advice, and intelligent
sympathy.

Coleridge-Taylor's life work was not finished,--it was but well begun.
He lived only his first period of creative genius, when melody and
harmony flashed and fluttered in subtle, compelling, and more than
promising profusion. He did not live to do the organized, constructive
work in the full, calm power of noonday,--the reflective finishing of
evening. In the annals of the future his name must always stand high,
but with the priceless gift of years, who can say where it might not
have stood.

Why should he have worked so breathlessly, almost furiously? It was, we
may be sure, because with unflinching determination and with no thought
of surrender he faced the great alternative,--the choice which the
cynical, thoughtless, busy, modern world spreads grimly before its
greater souls--food or beauty, bread and butter, or ideals. And
continually we see worthier men turning to the pettier, cheaper
thing--the popular portrait, the sensational novel, the jingling song.
The choice is not always between the least and the greatest, the high
and the empty, but only too often it is between starvation and
something. When, therefore, we see a man, working desperately to earn a
living and still stooping to no paltry dickering and to no unworthy
work, handing away a "Hiawatha" for less than a song, pausing for
glimpses of the stars when a world full of charcoal glowed far more
warmly and comfortably, we know that such a man is a hero in a sense
never approached by the swashbuckling soldier or the lying patriot.

Deep as was the primal tragedy in the life of Coleridge-Taylor, there
lay another still deeper. He smiled at it lightly, as we all do,--we who
live within the veil,--to hide the deeper hurt. He had, with us, that
divine and African gift of laughter, that echo of a thousand centuries
of suns. I mind me how once he told of the bishop, the well-groomed
English bishop, who eyed the artist gravely, with his eye-glass--hair
and color and figure,--and said quite audibly to his friends, "Quite
interesting--looks intelligent,--yes--yes!"

Fortunate was Coleridge-Taylor to be born in Europe and to speak a
universal tongue. In America he could hardly have had his career. His
genius was, to be sure, recognized (with some palpitation and
consternation) when it came full-grown across the seas with an English
imprint; but born here, it might never have been permitted to grow. We
know in America how to discourage, choke, and murder ability when it so
far forgets itself as to choose a dark skin. England, thank God, is
slightly more civilized than her colonies; but even there the path of
this young man was no way of roses and just a shade thornier than that
of whiter men. He did not complain at it,--he did not

     "Wince and cry aloud."

Rather the hint here and there of color discrimination in England
aroused in him deeper and more poignant sympathy with his people
throughout the world. He was one with that great company of
mixed-blooded men: Pushkin and Dumas, Hamilton and Douglass, Browning
and many others; but he more than most of these men knew the call of the
blood when it came and listened and answered. He came to America with
strange enthusiasm. He took with quite simple and unconscious grace the
conventional congratulations of the musical world. He was used to that.
But to his own people--to the sad sweetness of their voices, their
inborn sense of music, their broken, half-articulate voices,--he leapt
with new enthusiasm. From the fainter shadowings of his own life, he
sensed instinctively the vaster tragedy of theirs. His soul yearned to
give voice and being to this human thing. He early turned to the sorrow
songs. He sat at the faltering feet of Paul Laurence Dunbar and he asked
(as we sadly shook our heads) for some masterpiece of this world-tragedy
that his soul could set to music. And then, so characteristically, he
rushed back to England, composed a half-dozen exquisite harmonies
haunted by slave-songs, led the Welsh in their singing, listened to the
Scotch, ordered great music festivals in all England, wrote for Beerbohm
Tree, took on another music professorship, promised a trip to Germany,
and at last, staggering home one night, on his way to his wife and
little boy and girl, fell in his tracks and in four days was dead, at
the age of thirty-seven. They say that in his death-throe he arose and
facing some great, ghostly choir raised his last baton, while all around
the massive silence rang with the last mist-music of his dying ears.

He was buried from St. Michael's on September 5, 1912, with the acclaim
of kings and music masters and little children and to the majestic
melody of his own music. The tributes that followed him to his grave
were unusually hearty and sincere. The head of the Royal College calls
the first production of "Hiawatha" one of the most remarkable events in
modern English musical history and the trilogy one of the most
universally-beloved works of modern English music. One critic calls
Taylor's a name "which with that of Elgar represented the nation's most
individual output" and calls his "Atonement" "perhaps the finest passion
music of modern times." Another critic speaks of his originality:
"Though surrounded by the influences that are at work in Europe today,
he retained his individuality to the end, developing his style, however,
and evincing new ideas in each succeeding work. His untimely death at
the age of thirty-seven, a short life--like those of Schubert,
Mendelssohn, Chopin, and Hugo Wolf--has robbed the world of one of its
noblest singers, one of those few men of modern times who found
expression in the language of musical song, a lyricist of power and
worth."

But the tributes did not rest with the artist; with peculiar unanimity
they sought his "sterling character," "the good husband and father," the
"staunch and loyal friend." And perhaps I cannot better end these
hesitating words than with that tribute from one who called this master,
friend, and whose lament cried in the night with more of depth and
passion than Alfred Noyes is wont in his self-repression to voice:

    "Through him, his race, a moment, lifted up
      Forests of hands to beauty, as in prayer,
    Touched through his lips the sacramental cup
      And then sank back, benumbed in our bleak air."

Yet, consider: to many millions of people this man was all wrong.
_First_, he ought never to have been born, for he was the mulatto son of
a white woman. _Secondly_, he should never have been educated as a
musician,--he should have been trained, for his "place" in the world and
to make him satisfied therewith. _Thirdly_, he should not have married
the woman he loved and who loved him, for she was white and the niece of
an Oxford professor. _Fourthly_, the children of such a union--but why
proceed? You know it all by heart.

If he had been black, like Paul Laurence Dunbar, would the argument have
been different? No. He should never have been born, for he is a
"problem." He should never be educated, for he cannot be educated. He
should never marry, for that means children and there is no place for
black children in this world.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the treatment of the child the world foreshadows its own future and
faith. All words and all thinking lead to the child,--to that vast
immortality and the wide sweep of infinite possibility which the child
represents. Such thought as this it was that made the Master say of old
as He saw baby faces:

"And whosoever shall offend one of these little ones, it is better for
him that a millstone were hanged about his neck and he were cast into
the sea."

And yet the mothers and fathers and the men and women of my race must
often pause and ask: Is it worth while? Ought children be born to us?
Have we any right to make human souls face what we face today? The
answer is clear: If the great battle of human right against poverty,
against disease, against color prejudice is to be won, it must be won,
not in our day, but in the day of our children's children. Ours is the
blood and dust of battle; theirs the rewards of victory. If, then, they
are not there because we have not brought them into the world, we have
been the guiltiest factor in conquering ourselves. It is our duty, then,
to accomplish the immortality of black blood, in order that the day may
come in this dark world when poverty shall be abolished, privilege be
based on individual desert, and the color of a man's skin be no bar to
the outlook of his soul.

If it is our duty as honest colored men and women, battling for a great
principle, to bring not aimless rafts of children to the world, but as
many as, with reasonable sacrifice, we can train to largest manhood,
what in its inner essence shall that training be, particularly in its
beginning?

The first temptation is to shield the child,--to hedge it about that it
may not know and will not dream of the color line. Then when we can no
longer wholly shield, to indulge and pamper and coddle, as though in
this dumb way to compensate. From this attitude comes the multitude of
our spoiled, wayward, disappointed children. And must we not blame
ourselves? For while the motive was pure and the outer menace undoubted,
is shielding and indulgence the way to meet it?

Some Negro parents, realizing this, leave their children to sink or swim
in this sea of race prejudice. They neither shield nor explain, but
thrust them forth grimly into school or street and let them learn as
they may from brutal fact. Out of this may come strength, poise,
self-dependence, and out of it, too, may come bewilderment, cringing
deception, and self-distrust. It is, all said, a brutal, unfair method,
and in its way it is as bad as shielding and indulgence. Why not,
rather, face the facts and tell the truth? Your child is wiser than you
think.

The truth lies ever between extremes. It is wrong to introduce the child
to race consciousness prematurely; it is dangerous to let that
consciousness grow spontaneously without intelligent guidance. With
every step of dawning intelligence, explanation--frank, free, guiding
explanation--must come. The day will dawn when mother must explain
gently but clearly why the little girls next door do not want to play
with "niggers"; what the real cause is of the teacher's unsympathetic
attitude; and how people may ride in the backs of street cars and the
smoker end of trains and still be people, honest high-minded souls.

Remember, too, that in such frank explanation you are speaking in nine
cases out of ten to a good deal clearer understanding than you think and
that the child-mind has what your tired soul may have lost faith
in,--the Power and the Glory.

Out of little, unspoiled souls rise up wonderful resources and healing
balm. Once the colored child understands the white world's attitude and
the shameful wrong of it, you have furnished it with a great life
motive,--a power and impulse toward good which is the mightiest thing
man has. How many white folk would give their own souls if they might
graft into their children's souls a great, moving, guiding ideal!

With this Power there comes, in the transfiguring soul of childhood, the
Glory: the vision of accomplishment, the lofty ideal. Once let the
strength of the motive work, and it becomes the life task of the parent
to guide and to shape the ideal; to raise it from resentment and revenge
to dignity and self-respect, to breadth and accomplishment, to human
service; to beat back every thought of cringing and surrender.

Here, at last, we can speak with no hesitation, with no lack of faith.
For we know that as the world grows better there will be realized in our
children's lives that for which we fight unfalteringly, but vainly now.

So much for the problem of the home and our own dark children. Now let
us look beyond the pale upon the children of the wide world. What is the
real lesson of the life of Coleridge-Taylor? It is this: humanly
speaking it was sheer accident that this boy developed his genius. We
have a right to assume that hundreds and thousands of boys and girls
today are missing the chance of developing unusual talents because the
chances have been against them; and that indeed the majority of the
children of the world are not being systematically fitted for their life
work and for life itself. Why?

Many seek the reason in the content of the school program. They
feverishly argue the relative values of Greek, mathematics, and manual
training, but fail with singular unanimity in pointing out the
fundamental cause of our failure in human education: That failure is due
to the fact that we aim not at the full development of the child, but
that the world regards and always has regarded education first as a
means of buttressing the established order of things rather than
improving it. And this is the real reason why strife, war, and
revolution have marked the onward march of humanity instead of reason
and sound reform. Instead of seeking to push the coming generation ahead
of our pitiful accomplishment, we insist that it march behind. We say,
morally, that high character is conformity to present public opinion; we
say industrially that the present order is best and that children must
be trained to perpetuate it.

But, it is objected, what else can we do? Can we teach Revolution to the
inexperienced in hope that they may discern progress? No, but we may
teach frankly that this world is not perfection, but development: that
the object of education is manhood and womanhood, clear reason,
individual talent and genius and the spirit of service and sacrifice,
and not simply a frantic effort to avoid change in present institutions;
that industry is for man and not man for industry and that while we must
have workers to work, the prime object of our training is not the work
but the worker--not the maintenance of present industrial caste but the
development of human intelligence by which drudgery may be lessened and
beauty widened.

Back of our present educational system is the philosophy that sneers at
the foolish Fathers who believed it self-evident, "that all men were
created free and equal." Surely the overwhelming evidence is today that
men are slaves and unequal. But is it not education that is the creator
of this freedom and equality? Most men today cannot conceive of a
freedom that does not involve somebody's slavery. They do not want
equality because the thrill of their happiness comes from having things
that others have not. But may not human education fix the fine ideal of
an equal maximum of freedom for every human soul combined with that
minimum of slavery for each soul which the inexorable physical facts of
the world impose--rather than complete freedom for some and complete
slavery for others; and, again, is not the equality toward which the
world moves an equality of honor in the assigned human task itself
rather than equal facility in doing different tasks? Human equality is
not lack of difference, nor do the infinite human differences argue
relative superiority and inferiority. And, again, how new an aspect
human differences may assume when all men are educated. Today we think
of apes, semi-apes, and human beings; tomorrow we may think of Keir
Hardies, Roosevelts, and Beethovens--not equals but men. Today we are
forcing men into educational slavery in order that others may enjoy
life, and excuse ourselves by saying that the world's work must be done.
We are degrading some sorts of work by honoring others, and then
expressing surprise that most people object to having their children
trained solely to take up their father's tasks.

Given as the ideal the utmost possible freedom for every human soul,
with slavery for none, and equal honor for all necessary human tasks,
then our problem of education is greatly simplified: we aim to develop
human souls; to make all intelligent; to discover special talents and
genius. With this course of training beginning in early childhood and
never ceasing must go the technical training for the present world's
work according to carefully studied individual gifts and wishes.

On the other hand, if we arrange our system of education to develop
workmen who will not strike and Negroes satisfied with their present
place in the world, we have set ourselves a baffling task. We find
ourselves compelled to keep the masses ignorant and to curb our own
thought and expression so as not to inflame the ignorant. We force
moderate reformers and men with new and valuable ideas to become red
radicals and revolutionists, since that happens to be the only way to
make the world listen to reason. Consider our race problem in the South:
the South has invested in Negro ignorance; some Northerners proposed
limited education, not, they explained, to better the Negro, but merely
to make the investment more profitable to the present beneficiaries.
They thus gained wide Southern support for schools like Hampton and
Tuskegee. But could this program be expected long to satisfy colored
folk? And was this shifty dodging of the real issue the wisest
statesmanship? No! The real question in the South is the question of the
permanency of present color caste. The problem, then, of the formal
training of our colored children has been strangely complicated by the
strong feeling of certain persons as to their future in America and the
world. And the reaction toward this caste education has strengthened the
idea of caste education throughout the world.

Let us then return to fundamental ideals. Children must be trained in a
knowledge of what the world is and what it knows and how it does its
daily work. These things cannot be separated: we cannot teach pure
knowledge apart from actual facts, or separate truth from the human
mind. Above all we must not forget that the object of all education is
the child itself and not what it does or makes.

It is here that a great movement in America has grievously sinned
against the light. There has arisen among us a movement to make the
Public School primarily the hand-maiden of production. America is
conceived of as existing for the sake of its mines, fields and
factories, and not those factories, fields and mines as existing for
America. Consequently, the public schools are for training the mass of
men as servants and laborers and mechanics to increase the land's
industrial efficiency.

Those who oppose this program, especially if they are black, are accused
of despising common toil and humble service. In fact, we Negroes are but
facing in our own children a world problem: how can we, while
maintaining a proper output of goods and furnishing needed services,
increase the knowledge of experience of common men and conserve genius
for the common weal? Without wider, deeper intelligence among the masses
Democracy cannot accomplish its greater ends. Without a more careful
conservation of human ability and talent the world cannot secure the
services which its greater needs call for. Yet today who goes to
college, the Talented or the Rich? Who goes to high school, the Bright
or the Well-to-Do? Who does the physical work of the world, those whose
muscles need the exercise or those whose souls and minds are stupefied
with manual toil? How is the drudgery of the world distributed, by
thoughtful justice or the lash of Slavery?

We cannot base the education of future citizens on the present
inexcusable inequality of wealth nor on physical differences of race. We
must seek not to make men carpenters but to make carpenters men.

Colored Americans must then with deep determination educate their
children in the broadest, highest way. They must fill the colleges with
the talented and fill the fields and shops with the intelligent. Wisdom
is the principal thing. Therefore, get wisdom.

But why am I talking simply of "colored" children? Is not the problem of
their education simply an intensification of the problem of educating
all children? Look at our plight in the United States, nearly 150 years
after the establishment of a government based on human intelligence.

If we take the figures of the Thirteenth Census, we find that there were
five and one-half million illiterate Americans of whom 3,184,633 were
white. Remembering that illiteracy is a crude and extreme test of
ignorance, we may assume that there are in the United States ten million
people over ten years of age who are too ignorant either to perform
their civic duties or to teach industrial efficiency. Moreover, it does
not seem that this illiteracy is disappearing rapidly.

For instance, nine percent of American children between ten and
nineteen years of age cannot read and write. Moreover, there are
millions of children who, judging by the figures for the school year
1909-10, are not going to learn to read and write, for of the Americans
six to fourteen years of age there were 3,125,392 who were not in school
a single day during that year. If we take the eleven million youths
fifteen to twenty years of age for whom vocational training is
particularly adapted, we find that nearly five per cent of these, or
448,414, are absolutely illiterate; it is not too much to assume that a
million of them have not acquired enough of the ordinary tools of
intelligence to make the most of efficient vocational training.

Confining ourselves to the white people, over fifteen per cent of the
white children six to fourteen years of age, or 2,253,198, did not
attend school during the school year 1909-10. Of the native white
children of native parents ten to fourteen years of age nearly a tenth
were not in school during that year; 121,878 native white children of
native parents, fifteen to nineteen years of age, were illiterate.

If we continue our attention to the colored children, the case is, of
course, much worse.

We cannot hope to make intelligent workmen and intelligent citizens of a
group of people, over forty per cent of whose children six to fourteen
years of age were not in school a single day during 1909-10; for the
other sixty per cent the school term in the majority of cases was
probably less than five months. Of the Negro children ten to fourteen
years of age 18.9 per cent were illiterate; of those fifteen to nineteen
years of age 20.3 per cent were illiterate; of those ten to fourteen
years of age 31.4 per cent did not go to school a single day in 1909-10.

What is the trouble? It is simple. We are spending one dollar for
education where we should spend ten dollars. If tomorrow we multiplied
our effort to educate the next generation ten-fold, we should but begin
our bounden duty. The heaven that lies about our infancy is but the
ideals come true which every generation of children is capable of
bringing; but we, selfish in our own ignorance and incapacity, are
making of education a series of miserable compromises: How ignorant can
we let a child grow to be in order to make him the best cotton mill
operative? What is the least sum that will keep the average youth out of
jail? How many months saved on a high school course will make the
largest export of wheat?

If we realized that children are the future, that immortality is the
present child, that no education which educates can possibly be too
costly, then we know that the menace of Kaiserism which called for the
expenditure of more than 332 thousand millions of dollars was not a whit
more pressing than the menace of ignorance, and that no nation tomorrow
will call itself civilized which does not give every single human being
college and vocational training free and under the best teaching force
procurable for love or money.

This world has never taken the education of children seriously. Misled
by selfish dreamings of personal life forever, we have neglected the
true and practical immortality through the endless life of children's
children. Seeking counsels of our own souls' perfection, we have
despised and rejected the possible increasing perfection of unending
generations. Or if we are thrown back in pessimistic despair from making
living folk decent, we leap to idle speculations of a thousand years
hereafter instead of working steadily and persistently for the next
generation.

All our problems center in the child. All our hopes, our dreams are for
our children. Has our own life failed? Let its lesson save the
children's lives from similar failure. Is democracy a failure? Train up
citizens that will make it succeed. Is wealth too crude, too foolish in
form, and too easily stolen? Train up workers with honor and consciences
and brains. Have we degraded service with menials? Abolish the mean
spirit and implant sacrifice. Do we despise women? Train them as workers
and thinkers and not as playthings, lest future generations ape our
worst mistake. Do we despise darker races? Teach the children its fatal
cost in spiritual degradation and murder, teach them that to hate
"niggers" or "chinks" is to crucify souls like their own. Is there
anything we would accomplish with human beings? Do it with the immortal
child, with a stretch of endless time for doing it and with infinite
possibilities to work on.

Is this our attitude toward education? It is not--neither in England nor
America--in France nor Germany--with black nor white nor yellow folk.
Education to the modern world is a burden which we are driven to carry.
We shirk and complain. We do just as little as possible and only threat
or catastrophe induces us to do more than a minimum. If the ignorant
mass, panting to know, revolts, we dole them gingerly enough knowledge
to pacify them temporarily. If, as in the Great War, we discover
soldiers too ignorant to use our machines of murder and destruction, we
train them--to use machines of murder and destruction. If mounting
wealth calls for intelligent workmen, we rush tumultuously to train
workers--in order to increase our wealth. But of great, broad plans to
train all men for all things--to make a universe intelligent, busy,
good, creative and beautiful--where in this wide world is such an
educational program? To announce it is to invite gasps or Brobdingnagian
laughter. It cannot be done. It will cost too much.

What has been done with man can be done with men, if the world tries
long enough and hard enough. And as to the cost--all the wealth of the
world, save that necessary for sheer decent existence and for the
maintenance of past civilization, is, and of right ought to be, the
property of the children for their education.

I mean it. In one year, 1917, we spent $96,700,000,000 for war. We blew
it away to murder, maim, and destroy! Why? Because the blind, brutal
crime of powerful and selfish interests made this path through hell the
only visible way to heaven. We did it. We had to do it, and we are glad
the putrid horror is over. But, now, are we prepared to spend less to
make a world in which the resurgence of such devilish power will be
impossible?

Do we really want war to cease?

Then educate the children of this generation at a cost no whit less and
if necessary a hundred times as great as the cost of the Great War.

Last year, 1917, education cost us $915,000,000.

Next year it ought to cost us at least two thousand million dollars. We
should spend enough money to hire the best teaching force possible--the
best organizing and directing ability in the land, even if we have to
strip the railroads and meat trust. We should dot city and country with
the most efficient, sanitary, and beautiful school-houses the world
knows and we should give every American child common school, high
school, and college training and then vocational guidance in earning a
living.

Is this a dream?

Can we afford less?

Consider our so-called educational "problems"; "How may we keep pupils
in the high school?" Feed and clothe them. "Shall we teach Latin, Greek,
and mathematics to the 'masses'?" If they are worth teaching to anybody,
the masses need them most. "Who shall go to college?" Everybody. "When
shall culture training give place to technical education for work?"
Never.

These questions are not "problems." They are simply "excuses" for
spending less time and money on the next generation. Given ten millions
of dollars a year, what can we best do with the education of a million
children? The real answer is--kill nine hundred and ninety thousand of
them quickly and not gradually, and make thoroughly-trained men and
women of the other ten thousand. But who set the limit of ten million
dollars? Who says it shall not be ten thousand millions, as it ought to
be? You and I say it, and in saying it we sin against the Holy Ghost.

We sin because in our befuddled brains we have linked money and
education inextricably. We assume that only the wealthy have a real
right to education when, in fact, being born is being given a right to
college training. Our wealth today is, we all know, distributed mainly
by chance inheritance and personal favor and yet we attempt to base the
right to education on this foundation. The result is grotesque! We bury
genius; we send it to jail; we ridicule and mock it, while we send
mediocrity and idiocy to college, gilded and crowned. For three hundred
years we have denied black Americans an education and now we exploit
them before a gaping world: See how ignorant and degraded they are! All
they are fit for is education for cotton-picking and dish-washing. When
Dunbar and Taylor happen along, we are torn between something like
shamefaced anger or impatient amazement.

A world guilty of this last and mightiest war has no right to enjoy or
create until it has made the future safe from another Arkansas or
Rheims. To this there is but one patent way, proved and inescapable,
Education, and that not for me or for you but for the Immortal Child.
And that child is of all races and all colors. All children are the
children of all and not of individuals and families and races. The whole
generation must be trained and guided and out of it as out of a huge
reservoir must be lifted all genius, talent, and intelligence to serve
all the world.




Almighty Death[1]


    Softly, quite softly--
    For I hear, above the murmur of the sea,
    Faint and far-fallen footsteps, as of One
    Who comes from out beyond the endless ends of Time,
    With voice that downward looms thro' singing stars;
    Its subtle sound I see thro' these long-darkened eyes,
    I hear the Light He bringeth on His hands--
    Almighty Death!
    Softly, oh, softly, lest He pass me by,
    And that unquivering Light toward which my longing soul
    And tortured body through these years have writhed,
    Fade to the dun darkness of my days.

    Softly, full softly, let me rise and greet
    The strong, low luting of that long-awaited call;
    Swiftly be all my good and going gone,
    And this vast veiled and vanquished vigor of my soul
    Seek somehow otherwhere its rest and goal,
    Where endless spaces stretch,
    Where endless time doth moan,
    Where endless light doth pour
    Thro' the black kingdoms of eternal death.

    Then haply I may see what things I have not seen,
    Then I may know what things I have not known;
    Then may I do my dreams.

    Farewell! No sound of idle mourning let there be
    To shudder this full silence--save the voice
    Of children--little children, white and black,
    Whispering the deeds I tried to do for them;
    While I at last unguided and alone
    Pass softly, full softly.

[Footnote 1: For Joseph Pulitzer, October 29, 1911.]





IX

OF BEAUTY AND DEATH


For long years we of the world gone wild have looked into the face of
death and smiled. Through all our bitter tears we knew how beautiful it
was to die for that which our souls called sufficient. Like all true
beauty this thing of dying was so simple, so matter-of-fact. The boy
clothed in his splendid youth stood before us and laughed in his own
jolly way,--went and was gone. Suddenly the world was full of the
fragrance of sacrifice. We left our digging and burden-bearing; we
turned from our scraping and twisting of things and words; we paused
from our hurrying hither and thither and walking up and down, and asked
in half-whisper: this Death--is this Life? And is its beauty real or
false? And of this heart-questioning I am writing.

       *       *       *       *       *

My friend, who is pale and positive, said to me yesterday, as the tired
sun was nodding:

"You are too sensitive."

I admit, I am--sensitive. I am artificial. I cringe or am bumptious or
immobile. I am intellectually dishonest, art-blind, and I lack humor.

"Why don't you stop all this?" she retorts triumphantly.

You will not let us.

"There you go, again. You know that I--"

Wait! I answer. Wait!

I arise at seven. The milkman has neglected me. He pays little attention
to colored districts. My white neighbor glares elaborately. I walk
softly, lest I disturb him. The children jeer as I pass to work. The
women in the street car withdraw their skirts or prefer to stand. The
policeman is truculent. The elevator man hates to serve Negroes. My job
is insecure because the white union wants it and does not want me. I try
to lunch, but no place near will serve me. I go forty blocks to
Marshall's, but the Committee of Fourteen closes Marshall's; they say
white women frequent it.

"Do all eating places discriminate?"

No, but how shall I know which do not--except--

I hurry home through crowds. They mutter or get angry. I go to a
mass-meeting. They stare. I go to a church. "We don't admit niggers!"

Or perhaps I leave the beaten track. I seek new work. "Our employees
would not work with you; our customers would object."

I ask to help in social uplift.

"Why--er--we will write you."

I enter the free field of science. Every laboratory door is closed and
no endowments are available.

I seek the universal mistress, Art; the studio door is locked.

I write literature. "We cannot publish stories of colored folks of that
type." It's the only type I know.

This is my life. It makes me idiotic. It gives me artificial problems. I
hesitate, I rush, I waver. In fine,--I am sensitive!

My pale friend looks at me with disbelief and curling tongue.

"Do you mean to sit there and tell me that this is what happens to you
each day?"

Certainly not, I answer low.

"Then you only fear it will happen?"

I fear!

"Well, haven't you the courage to rise above a--almost a craven fear?"

Quite--quite craven is my fear, I admit; but the terrible thing
is--these things do happen!

"But you just said--"

They do happen. Not all each day,--surely not. But now and then--now
seldom, now, sudden; now after a week, now in a chain of awful minutes;
not everywhere, but anywhere--in Boston, in Atlanta. That's the hell of
it. Imagine spending your life looking for insults or for hiding places
from them--shrinking (instinctively and despite desperate bolsterings of
courage) from blows that are not always but ever; not each day, but each
week, each month, each year. Just, perhaps, as you have choked back the
craven fear and cried, "I am and will be the master of my--"

"No more tickets downstairs; here's one to the smoking gallery."

You hesitate. You beat back your suspicions. After all, a cigarette with
Charlie Chaplin--then a white man pushes by--

"Three in the orchestra."

"Yes, sir." And in he goes.

Suddenly your heart chills. You turn yourself away toward the golden
twinkle of the purple night and hesitate again. What's the use? Why not
always yield--always take what's offered,--always bow to force, whether
of cannon or dislike? Then the great fear surges in your soul, the real
fear--the fear beside which other fears are vain imaginings; the fear
lest right there and then you are losing your own soul; that you are
losing your own soul and the soul of a people; that millions of unborn
children, black and gold and mauve, are being there and then despoiled
by you because you are a coward and dare not fight!

Suddenly that silly orchestra seat and the cavorting of a comedian with
funny feet become matters of life, death, and immortality; you grasp the
pillars of the universe and strain as you sway back to that befrilled
ticket girl. You grip your soul for riot and murder. You choke and
sputter, and she seeing that you are about to make a "fuss" obeys her
orders and throws the tickets at you in contempt. Then you slink to your
seat and crouch in the darkness before the film, with every tissue
burning! The miserable wave of reaction engulfs you. To think of
compelling puppies to take your hard-earned money; fattening hogs to
hate you and yours; forcing your way among cheap and tawdry idiots--God!
What a night of pleasure!

       *       *       *       *       *

Here, then, is beauty and ugliness, a wide vision of world-sacrifice, a
fierce gleam of world-hate. Which is life and what is death and how
shall we face so tantalizing a contradiction? Any explanation must
necessarily be subtle and involved. No pert and easy word of
encouragement, no merely dark despair, can lay hold of the roots of
these things. And first and before all, we cannot forget that this world
is beautiful. Grant all its ugliness and sin--the petty, horrible snarl
of its putrid threads, which few have seen more near or more often than
I--notwithstanding all this, the beauty of this world is not to be
denied.

Casting my eyes about I dare not let them rest on the beauty of Love and
Friend, for even if my tongue were cunning enough to sing this, the
revelation of reality here is too sacred and the fancy too untrue. Of
one world-beauty alone may we at once be brutally frank and that is the
glory of physical nature; this, though the last of beauties, is divine!

And so, too, there are depths of human degradation which it is not fair
for us to probe. With all their horrible prevalence, we cannot call them
natural. But may we not compare the least of the world's beauty with the
least of its ugliness--not murder, starvation, and rapine, with love and
friendship and creation--but the glory of sea and sky and city, with the
little hatefulnesses and thoughtfulnesses of race prejudice, that out
of such juxtaposition we may, perhaps, deduce some rule of beauty and
life--or death?

       *       *       *       *       *

There mountains hurl themselves against the stars and at their feet lie
black and leaden seas. Above float clouds--white, gray, and inken, while
the clear, impalpable air springs and sparkles like new wine. Last night
we floated on the calm bosom of the sea in the southernmost haven of
Mount Desert. The water flamed and sparkled. The sun had gone, but above
the crooked back of cumulus clouds, dark and pink with radiance, and on
the other sky aloft to the eastward piled the gorgeous-curtained mists
of evening. The radiance faded and a shadowy velvet veiled the
mountains, a humid depth of gloom behind which lurked all the mysteries
of life and death, while above, the clouds hung ashen and dull; lights
twinkled and flashed along the shore, boats glided in the twilight, and
the little puffing of motors droned away. Then was the hour to talk of
life and the meaning of life, while above gleamed silently, suddenly,
star on star.

Bar Harbor lies beneath a mighty mountain, a great, bare, black mountain
that sleeps above the town; but as you leave, it rises suddenly,
threateningly, until far away on Frenchman's Bay it looms above the town
in withering vastness, as if to call all that little world petty save
itself. Beneath the cool, wide stare of that great mountain, men cannot
live as giddily as in some lesser summer's playground. Before the
unveiled face of nature, as it lies naked on the Maine coast, rises a
certain human awe.

God molded his world largely and mightily off this marvelous coast and
meant that in the tired days of life men should come and worship here
and renew their spirit. This I have done and turning I go to work again.
As we go, ever the mountains of Mount Desert rise and greet us on our
going--somber, rock-ribbed and silent, looking unmoved on the moving
world, yet conscious of their everlasting strength.

About us beats the sea--the sail-flecked, restless sea, humming its tune
about our flying keel, unmindful of the voices of men. The land sinks to
meadows, black pine forests, with here and there a blue and wistful
mountain. Then there are islands--bold rocks above the sea, curled
meadows; through and about them roll ships, weather-beaten and patched
of sail, strong-hulled and smoking, light gray and shining. All the
colors of the sea lie about us--gray and yellowing greens and doubtful
blues, blacks not quite black, tinted silvers and golds and dreaming
whites. Long tongues of dark and golden land lick far out into the
tossing waters, and the white gulls sail and scream above them. It is a
mighty coast--ground out and pounded, scarred, crushed, and carven in
massive, frightful lineaments. Everywhere stand the pines--the little
dark and steadfast pines that smile not, neither weep, but wait and
wait. Near us lie isles of flesh and blood, white cottages, tiled and
meadowed. Afar lie shadow-lands, high mist-hidden hills, mountains
boldly limned, yet shading to the sky, faint and unreal.

We skirt the pine-clad shores, chary of men, and know how bitterly
winter kisses these lonely shores to fill yon row of beaked ice houses
that creep up the hills. We are sailing due westward and the sun, yet
two hours high, is blazoning a fiery glory on the sea that spreads and
gleams like some broad, jeweled trail, to where the blue and distant
shadow-land lifts its carven front aloft, leaving, as it gropes, shades
of shadows beyond.

       *       *       *       *       *

Why do not those who are scarred in the world's battle and hurt by its
hardness travel to these places of beauty and drown themselves in the
utter joy of life? I asked this once sitting in a Southern home. Outside
the spring of a Georgia February was luring gold to the bushes and
languor to the soft air. Around me sat color in human flesh--brown that
crimsoned readily; dim soft-yellow that escaped description; cream-like
duskiness that shadowed to rich tints of autumn leaves. And yet a
suggested journey in the world brought no response.

"I should think you would like to travel," said the white one.

But no, the thought of a journey seemed to depress them.

Did you ever see a "Jim-Crow" waiting-room? There are always exceptions,
as at Greensboro--but usually there is no heat in winter and no air in
summer; with undisturbed loafers and train hands and broken,
disreputable settees; to buy a ticket is torture; you stand and stand
and wait and wait until every white person at the "other window" is
waited on. Then the tired agent yells across, because all the tickets
and money are over there--

"What d'ye want? What? Where?"

The agent browbeats and contradicts you, hurries and confuses the
ignorant, gives many persons the wrong change, compels some to purchase
their tickets on the train at a higher price, and sends you and me out
on the platform, burning with indignation and hatred!

The "Jim-Crow" car is up next the baggage car and engine. It stops out
beyond the covering in the rain or sun or dust. Usually there is no step
to help you climb on and often the car is a smoker cut in two and you
must pass through the white smokers or else they pass through your part,
with swagger and noise and stares. Your compartment is a half or a
quarter or an eighth of the oldest car in service on the road. Unless it
happens to be a thorough express, the plush is caked with dirt, the
floor is grimy, and the windows dirty. An impertinent white newsboy
occupies two seats at the end of the car and importunes you to the point
of rage to buy cheap candy, Coco-Cola, and worthless, if not vulgar,
books. He yells and swaggers, while a continued stream of white men
saunters back and forth from the smoker to buy and hear. The white train
crew from the baggage car uses the "Jim-Crow" to lounge in and perform
their toilet. The conductor appropriates two seats for himself and his
papers and yells gruffly for your tickets before the train has scarcely
started. It is best not to ask him for information even in the gentlest
tones. His information is for white persons chiefly. It is difficult to
get lunch or clean water. Lunch rooms either don't serve niggers or
serve them at some dirty and ill-attended hole in the wall. As for
toilet rooms,--don't! If you have to change cars, be wary of junctions
which are usually without accommodation and filled with quarrelsome
white persons who hate a "darky dressed up." You are apt to have the
company of a sheriff and a couple of meek or sullen black prisoners on
part of your way and dirty colored section hands will pour in toward
night and drive you to the smallest corner.

"No," said the little lady in the corner (she looked like an ivory cameo
and her dress flowed on her like a caress), "we don't travel much."

       *       *       *       *       *

Pessimism is cowardice. The man who cannot frankly acknowledge the
"Jim-Crow" car as a fact and yet live and hope is simply afraid either
of himself or of the world. There is not in the world a more disgraceful
denial of human brotherhood than the "Jim-Crow" car of the southern
United States; but, too, just as true, there is nothing more beautiful
in the universe than sunset and moonlight on Montego Bay in far Jamaica.
And both things are true and both belong to this our world, and neither
can be denied.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sun, prepared to cross that awful border which men call Night and
Death, marshals his hosts. I seem to see the spears of mighty horsemen
flash golden in the light; empurpled banners flame afar, and the low
thunder of marching hosts thrills with the thunder of the sea. Athwart
his own path, screening a face of fire, he throws cloud masses, masking
his trained guns. And then the miracle is done. The host passes with
roar too vast for human ear and the sun is set, leaving the frightened
moon and blinded stars.

In the dusk the green-gold palms turn their star-like faces and stretch
their fan-like fingers, lifting themselves proudly, lest any lordly leaf
should know the taint of earth.

Out from the isle the serpent hill thrusts its great length around the
bay, shouldering back the waters and the shadows. Ghost rains sweep
down, smearing his rugged sides, yet on he writhes, undulant with pine
and palm, gleaming until his low, sharp head and lambent tongue, grown
gray and pale and silver in the dying day, kisses the molten gold of the
golden sea.

Then comes the moon. Like fireflies nesting in the hand of God gleams
the city, dim-swathed by fairy palms. A long, thin thumb, mist-mighty,
points shadowy to the Spanish Main, while through the fingers foam the
Seven Seas. Above the calm and gold-green moon, beneath the wind-wet
earth; and here, alone, my soul enchained, enchanted!

       *       *       *       *       *

From such heights of holiness men turn to master the world. All the
pettiness of life drops away and it becomes a great battle before the
Lord. His trumpet,--where does it sound and whither? I go. I saw Montego
Bay at the beginning of the World War. The cry for service as high as
heaven, as wide as human feeling, seemed filling the earth. What were
petty slights, silly insults, paltry problems, beside this call to do
and dare and die? We black folk offered our services to fight. What
happened? Most Americans have forgotten the extraordinary series of
events which worked the feelings of black America to fever heat.

First was the refusal to accept Negro volunteers for the army, except in
the four black regiments already established. While the nation was
combing the country for volunteers for the regular army, it would not
let the American Negro furnish even his proportionate quota of regular
soldiers. This led to some grim bantering among Negroes:

"Why do you want to volunteer?" asked many. "Why should you fight for
this country?"

Before we had chance to reply to this, there came the army draft bill
and the proposal by Vardaman and his ilk to except Negroes. We protested
to Washington in various ways, and while we were insisting that colored
men should be drafted just as other citizens, the bill went through with
two little "jokers."

First, it provided that Negroes should be drafted, but trained in
"separate" units; and, secondly, it somewhat ambiguously permitted men
to be drafted for "labor."

A wave of fear and unrest spread among Negroes and while we were looking
at both these provisions askance, suddenly we received the draft
registration blank. It directed persons "of African descent" to "tear
off the corner!" Probably never before in the history of the United
States has a portion of the citizens been so openly and crassly
discriminated against by action of the general government. It was
disheartening, and on top of it came the celebrated "German plots." It
was alleged in various parts of the country with singular unanimity that
Germans were working among the Negroes, and it was further intimated
that this would make the Negroes too dangerous an element to trust with
guns. To us, of course, it looked as though the discovery and the
proposition came from the same thinly-veiled sources.

Considering carefully this series of happenings the American Negro
sensed an approaching crisis and faced a puzzling dilemma. Here was
evidently preparing fertile ground for the spread of disloyalty and
resentment among the black masses, as they were forced to choose
apparently between forced labor or a "Jim-Crow" draft. Manifestly when a
minority group is thus segregated and forced out of the nation, they can
in reason do but one thing--take advantage of the disadvantage. In this
case we demanded colored officers for the colored troops.

General Wood was early approached and asked to admit suitable candidates
to Plattsburg. He refused. We thereupon pressed the government for a
"separate" camp for the training of Negro officers. Not only did the War
Department hesitate at this request, but strong opposition arose among
colored people themselves. They said we were going too far. "We will
obey the law, but to ask for voluntary segregation is to insult
ourselves." But strong, sober second thought came to our rescue. We said
to our protesting brothers: "We face a condition, not a theory. There is
not the slightest chance of our being admitted to white camps;
therefore, it is either a case of a 'Jim-Crow' officers' training camp
or no colored officers. Of the two things no colored officers would be
the greater calamity."

Thus we gradually made up our minds. But the War Department still
hesitated. It was besieged, and when it presented its final argument,
"We have no place for such a camp," the trustees of Howard University
said: "Take our campus." Eventually twelve hundred colored cadets were
assembled at Fort Des Moines for officers' training.

The city of Des Moines promptly protested, but it finally changed its
mind. Des Moines never before had seen such a class of colored men. They
rapidly became popular with all classes and many encomiums were passed
upon their conduct. Their commanding colonel pronounced their work first
class and declared that they presented excellent material for officers.

Meantime, with one accord, the thought of the colored people turned
toward Colonel Young, their highest officer in the regular army. Charles
Young is a heroic figure. He is the typical soldier,--silent,
uncomplaining, brave, and efficient! From his days at West Point
throughout his thirty years of service he has taken whatever task was
assigned him and performed it efficiently; and there is no doubt but
that the army has been almost merciless in the requirements which it has
put upon this splendid officer. He came through all with flying colors.
In Haiti, in Liberia, in western camps, in the Sequoia Forests of
California, and finally with Pershing in Mexico,--in every case he
triumphed. Just at the time we were looking to the United States
government to call him to head the colored officers' training at Des
Moines, he was retired from the army, because of "high blood pressure!"
There is no disputing army surgeons and their judgment in this case may
be justified, but coming at the time it did, nearly every Negro in the
United States believed that the "high blood pressure" that retired
Colonel Young was in the prejudiced heads of the Southern oligarchy who
were determined that no American Negro should ever wear the stars of a
General.

To say that Negroes of the United States were disheartened at the
retirement of Colonel Young is to put it mildly,--but there was more
trouble. The provision that Negroes must be trained separately looked
simple and was simple in places where there were large Negro
contingents, but in the North with solitary Negroes drafted here and
there we had some extraordinary developments. Regiments appeared with
one Negro where the Negro had to be separated like a pest and put into a
house or even a village by himself while the commander frantically
telegraphed to Washington. Small wonder that one poor fellow in Ohio
solved the problem by cutting his throat. The whole process of drafting
Negroes had to be held up until the government could find methods and
places for assembling them.

Then came Houston. In a moment the nation forgot the whole record of one
of the most celebrated regiments in the United States Army and its
splendid service in the Indian Wars and in the Philippines. It was the
first regiment mobilized in the Spanish-American War and it was the
regiment that volunteered to a man to clean up the yellow fever camps
when others hesitated. It was one of the regiments to which Pershing
said in December:

"Men, I am authorized by Congress to tell you all that our people back
in the States are mightily glad and proud at the way the soldiers have
conducted themselves while in Mexico, and I, General Pershing, can say
with pride that a finer body of men never stood under the flag of our
nation than we find here tonight."

The nation, also, forgot the deep resentment mixed with the pale ghost
of fear which Negro soldiers call up in the breasts of the white South.
It is not so much that they fear that the Negro will strike if he gets a
chance, but rather that they assume with curious unanimity that he has
_reason_ to strike, that any other persons in his circumstances or
treated as he is would rebel. Instead of seeking to relieve the cause of
such a possible feeling, most of them strain every effort to bottle up
the black man's resentment. Is it inconceivable that now and then it
bursts all bounds, as at Brownsville and Houston?

So in the midst of this mental turmoil came Houston and East St. Louis.
At Houston black soldiers, goaded and insulted, suddenly went wild and
"shot up" the town. At East St. Louis white strikers on war work killed
and mobbed Negro workingmen, and as a result 19 colored soldiers were
hanged and 51 imprisoned for life for killing 17 whites at Houston,
while for killing 125 Negroes in East St. Louis, 20 white men were
imprisoned, none for more than 15 years, and 10 colored men with them.

       *       *       *       *       *

Once upon a time I took a great journey in this land to three of the
ends of our world and over seven thousand mighty miles. I saw the grim
desert and the high ramparts of the Rocky Mountains. Three days I flew
from the silver beauty of Seattle to the somber whirl of Kansas City.
Three days I flew from the brute might of Chicago to the air of the
Angels in California, scented with golden flowers, where the homes of
men crouch low and loving on the good, broad earth, as though they were
kissing her blossoms. Three days I flew through the empire of Texas, but
all these shall be tales untold, for in all this journey I saw but one
thing that lived and will live eternal in my soul,--the Grand CaÃ±on.

It is a sudden void in the bosom of the earth, down to its entrails--a
wound where the dull titanic knife has turned and twisted in the hole,
leaving its edges livid, scarred, jagged, and pulsing over the white,
and red, and purple of its mighty flesh, while down below--down, down
below, in black and severed vein, boils the dull and sullen flood of the
Colorado.

It is awful. There can be nothing like it. It is the earth and sky gone
stark and raving mad. The mountains up-twirled, disbodied and inverted,
stand on their peaks and throw their bowels to the sky. Their earth is
air; their ether blood-red rock engreened. You stand upon their roots
and fall into their pinnacles, a mighty mile.

Behold this mauve and purple mocking of time and space! See yonder peak!
No human foot has trod it. Into that blue shadow only the eye of God has
looked. Listen to the accents of that gorge which mutters: "Before
Abraham was, I am." Is yonder wall a hedge of black or is it the rampart
between heaven and hell? I see greens,--is it moss or giant pines? I see
specks that may be boulders. Ever the winds sigh and drop into those
sun-swept silences. Ever the gorge lies motionless, unmoved, until I
fear. It is a grim thing, unholy, terrible! It is human--some mighty
drama unseen, unheard, is playing there its tragedies or mocking comedy,
and the laugh of endless years is shrieking onward from peak to peak,
unheard, unechoed, and unknown.

One throws a rock into the abyss. It gives back no sound. It falls on
silence--the voice of its thunders cannot reach so far. It is not--it
cannot be a mere, inert, unfeeling, brute fact--its grandeur is too
serene--its beauty too divine! It is not red, and blue, and green, but,
ah! the shadows and the shades of all the world, glad colorings touched
with a hesitant spiritual delicacy. What does it mean--what does it
mean? Tell me, black and boiling water!

It is not real. It is but shadows. The shading of eternity. Last night
yonder tesselated palace was gloom--dark, brooding thought and sin,
while hither rose the mountains of the sun, golden, blazing,
ensanguined. It was a dream. This blue and brilliant morning shows all
those burning peaks alight, while here, shapeless, mistful, brood the
shadowed towers.

I have been down into the entrails of earth--down, down by straight and
staring cliffs--down by sounding waters and sun-strewn meadows; down by
green pastures and still waters, by great, steep chasms--down by the
gnarled and twisted fists of God to the deep, sad moan of the yellow
river that did this thing of wonder,--a little winding river with death
in its depth and a crown of glory in its flying hair.

I have seen what eye of man was never meant to see. I have profaned the
sanctuary. I have looked upon the dread disrobing of the Night, and yet
I live. Ere I hid my head she was standing in her cavern halls, glowing
coldly westward--her feet were blackness: her robes, empurpled, flowed
mistily from shoulder down in formless folds of folds; her head,
pine-crowned, was set with jeweled stars. I turned away and dreamed--the
caÃ±on,--the awful, its depths called; its heights shuddered. Then
suddenly I arose and looked. Her robes were falling. At dim-dawn they
hung purplish-green and black. Slowly she stripped them from her gaunt
and shapely limbs--her cold, gray garments shot with shadows stood
revealed. Down dropped the black-blue robes, gray-pearled and slipped,
leaving a filmy, silken, misty thing, and underneath I glimpsed her
limbs of utter light.

       *       *       *       *       *

My God! For what am I thankful this night? For nothing. For nothing but
the most commonplace of commonplaces; a table of gentlewomen and
gentlemen--soft-spoken, sweet-tempered, full of human sympathy, who made
me, a stranger, one of them. Ours was a fellowship of common books,
common knowledge, mighty aims. We could laugh and joke and think as
friends--and the Thing--the hateful, murderous, dirty Thing which in
American we call "Nigger-hatred" was not only not there--it could not
even be understood. It was a curious monstrosity at which civilized folk
laughed or looked puzzled. There was no elegant and elaborate
condescension of--"We once had a colored servant"--"My father was an
Abolitionist"--"I've always been interested in _your people_"--there was
only the community of kindred souls, the delicate reverence for the
Thought that led, the quick deference to the guest. You left in quiet
regret, knowing that they were not discussing you behind your back with
lies and license. God! It was simply human decency and I had to be
thankful for it because I am an American Negro, and white America, with
saving exceptions, is cruel to everything that has black blood--and
this was Paris, in the years of salvation, 1919. Fellow blacks, we must
join the democracy of Europe.

       *       *       *       *       *

Toul! Dim through the deepening dark of early afternoon, I saw its
towers gloom dusky toward the murk of heaven. We wound in misty roads
and dropped upon the city through the great throats of its walled
bastions. There lay France--a strange, unknown, unfamiliar France. The
city was dispossessed. Through its streets--its narrow, winding streets,
old and low and dark, carven and quaint,--poured thousands upon
thousands of strange feet of khaki-clad foreigners, and the echoes threw
back awkward syllables that were never French. Here was France beaten to
her knees yet fighting as never nation fought before, calling in her
death agony across the seas till her help came and with all its strut
and careless braggadocio saved the worthiest nation of the world from
the wickedest fate ever plotted by Fools.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tim Brimm was playing by the town-pump. Tim Brimm and the bugles of
Harlem blared in the little streets of Maron in far Lorraine. The tiny
streets were seas of mud. Dank mist and rain sifted through the cold air
above the blue Moselle. Soldiers--soldiers everywhere--black soldiers,
boys of Washington, Alabama, Philadelphia, Mississippi. Wild and sweet
and wooing leapt the strains upon the air. French children gazed in
wonder--women left their washing. Up in the window stood a black Major,
a Captain, a Teacher, and I--with tears behind our smiling eyes. Tim
Brimm was playing by the town-pump.

The audience was framed in smoke. It rose ghost-like out of
memories--bitter memories of the officer near dead of pneumonia whose
pain was lighted up by the nurses waiting to know whether he must be
"Jim-Crowed" with privates or not. Memories of that great last morning
when the thunders of hell called the Ninety-second to its last drive.
Memories of bitter humiliations, determined triumphs, great victories,
and bugle-calls that sounded from earth to heaven. Like memories framed
in the breath of God, my audience peered in upon me--good, brown faces
with great, kind, beautiful eyes--black soldiers of America rescuing
beloved France--and the words came in praise and benediction there in
the "Y," with its little stock of cigarettes and candies and its rusty
wood stove.

"_Alors_," said Madame, "_quatre sont morts_"--four dead--four tall,
strong sons dead for France--sons like the sweet and blue-eyed daughter
who was hiding her brave smile in the dusk. It was a tiny stone house
whose front window lipped the passing sidewalk where ever tramped the
feet of black soldiers marching home. There was a cavernous wardrobe, a
great fireplace invaded by a new and jaunty iron stove. Vast, thick
piles of bedding rose in yonder corner. Without was the crowded kitchen
and up a half-stair was our bedroom that gave upon a tiny court with
arched stone staircase and one green tree. We were a touching family
party held together by a great sorrow and a great joy. How we laughed
over the salad that got brandy instead of vinegar--how we ate the golden
pile of fried potatoes and how we pored over the post-card from the
Lieutenant of the Senegalese--dear little vale of crushed and risen
France, in the day when Negroes went "over the top" at Pont-Ã -Mousson.

       *       *       *       *       *

Paris, Paris by purple faÃ§ade of the opera, the crowd on the Boulevard
des Italiens and the great swing of the Champs ElysÃ©es. But not the
Paris the world knows. Paris with its soul cut to the core--feverish,
crowded, nervous, hurried; full of uniforms and mourning bands, with
cafÃ©s closed at 9:30--no sugar, scarce bread, and tears so interwined
with joy that there is scant difference. Paris has been dreaming a
nightmare, and though she awakes, the grim terror is upon her--it lies
on the sand-closed art treasures of the Louvre. Only the flowers are
there, always the flowers, the Roses of England and the Lilies of
France.

       *       *       *       *       *

New York! Behind the Liberty that faces free France rise the white
cliffs of Manhattan, tier on tier, with a curving pinnacle, towers
square and twin, a giant inkwell daintily stoppered, an ancient pyramid
enthroned; beneath, low ramparts wide and mighty; while above,
faint-limned against the turbulent sky, looms the vast grace of that
Cathedral of the Purchased and Purchasing Poor, topping the world and
pointing higher.

Yonder the gray cobwebs of the Brooklyn bridges leap the sea, and here
creep the argosies from all earth's ends. We move to this swift home on
dun and swelling waters and hear as we come the heartbeats of the new
world.

       *       *       *       *       *

New York and night from the Brooklyn Bridge: The bees and fireflies flit
and twinkle in their vast hives; curved clouds like the breath of gods
hover between the towers and the moon. One hears the hiss of lightnings,
the deep thunder of human things, and a fevered breathing as of some
attendant and invincible Powers. The glow of burning millions melts
outward into dim and fairy outlines until afar the liquid music born of
rushing crowds drips like a benediction on the sea.

       *       *       *       *       *

New York and morning: the sun is kissing the timid dew in Central Park,
and from the Fountain of Plenty one looks along that world street, Fifth
Avenue, and walks toward town. The earth life and curves graciously down
from the older mansions of princes to the newer shops of luxury. Egypt
and Abyssinia, Paris and Damascus, London and India caress you by the
way; churches stand aloof while the shops swell to emporiums. But all
this is nothing. Everything is mankind. Humanity stands and flies and
walks and rolls about--the poor, the priceless, the world-known and the
forgotten; child and grandfather, king and leman--the pageant of the
world goes by, set in a frame of stone and jewels, clothed in scarlet
and rags. Princes Street and the Elysian Fields, the Strand and the
Ringstrasse--these are the Ways of the World today.

       *       *       *       *       *

New York and twilight, there where the Sixth Avenue "L" rises and leaps
above the tenements into the free air at 110th Street. It circles like a
bird with heaven and St. John's above and earth and the sweet green and
gold of the Park beneath. Beyond lie all the blue mists and mysteries of
distance; beneath, the city rushes and crawls. Behind echo all the roar
and war and care and maze of the wide city set in its sullen darkening
walls, flashing weird and crimson farewells. Out at the sides the stars
twinkle.

       *       *       *       *       *

Again New York and Night and Harlem. A dark city of fifty thousand rises
like magic from the earth. Gone is the white world, the pale lips, the
lank hair; gone is the West and North--the East and South is here
triumphant. The street is crowd and leisure and laughter. Everywhere
black eyes, black and brown, and frizzled hair curled and sleek, and
skins that riot with luscious color and deep, burning blood. Humanity is
packed dense in high piles of close-knit homes that lie in layers above
gray shops of food and clothes and drink, with here and there a
moving-picture show. Orators declaim on the corners, lovers lark in the
streets, gamblers glide by the saloons, workers lounge wearily home.
Children scream and run and frolic, and all is good and human and
beautiful and ugly and evil, even as Life is elsewhere.

       *       *       *       *       *

And then--the Veil. It drops as drops the night on southern seas--vast,
sudden, unanswering. There is Hate behind it, and Cruelty and Tears. As
one peers through its intricate, unfathomable pattern of ancient, old,
old design, one sees blood and guilt and misunderstanding. And yet it
hangs there, this Veil, between Then and Now, between Pale and Colored
and Black and White--between You and Me. Surely it is a thought-thing,
tenuous, intangible; yet just as surely is it true and terrible and not
in our little day may you and I lift it. We may feverishly unravel its
edges and even climb slow with giant shears to where its ringed and
gilded top nestles close to the throne of God. But as we work and climb
we shall see through streaming eyes and hear with aching ears, lynching
and murder, cheating and despising, degrading and lying, so flashed and
fleshed through this vast hanging darkness that the Doer never sees the
Deed and the Victim knows not the Victor and Each hates All in wild and
bitter ignorance. Listen, O Isles, to these Voices from within the Veil,
for they portray the most human hurt of the Twentieth Cycle of that poor
Jesus who was called the Christ!

       *       *       *       *       *

There is something in the nature of Beauty that demands an end. Ugliness
may be indefinite. It may trail off into gray endlessness. But Beauty
must be complete--whether it be a field of poppies or a great life,--it
must end, and the End is part and triumph of the Beauty. I know there
are those who envisage a beauty eternal. But I cannot. I can dream of
great and never-ending processions of beautiful things and visions and
acts. But each must be complete or it cannot for me exist.

On the other hand, Ugliness to me is eternal, not in the essence but in
its incompleteness; but its eternity does not daunt me, for its eternal
unfulfilment is a cause of joy. There is in it nothing new or
unexpected; it is the old evil stretching out and ever seeking the end
it cannot find; it may coil and writhe and recur in endless battle to
days without end, but it is the same human ill and bitter hurt. But
Beauty is fulfilment. It satisfies. It is always new and strange. It is
the reasonable thing. Its end is Death--the sweet silence of perfection,
the calm and balance of utter music. Therein is the triumph of Beauty.

So strong is the spell of beauty that there are those who, contradicting
their own knowledge and experience, try to say that all is beauty. They
are called optimists, and they lie. All is not beauty. Ugliness and hate
and ill are here with all their contradiction and illogic; they will
always be here--perhaps, God send, with lessened volume and force, but
here and eternal, while beauty triumphs in its great completion--Death.
We cannot conjure the end of all ugliness in eternal beauty, for beauty
by its very being and definition has in each definition its ends and
limits; but while beauty lies implicit and revealed in its end, ugliness
writhes on in darkness forever. So the ugliness of continual birth
fulfils itself and conquers gloriously only in the beautiful end, Death.

       *       *       *       *       *

At last to us all comes happiness, there in the Court of Peace, where
the dead lie so still and calm and good. If we were not dead we would
lie and listen to the flowers grow. We would hear the birds sing and see
how the rain rises and blushes and burns and pales and dies in beauty.
We would see spring, summer, and the red riot of autumn, and then in
winter, beneath the soft white snow, sleep and dream of dreams. But we
know that being dead, our Happiness is a fine and finished thing and
that ten, a hundred, and a thousand years, we shall lie at rest, unhurt
in the Court of Peace.




_The Prayers of God_


    Name of God's Name!
    Red murder reigns;
    All hell is loose;
    On gold autumnal air
    Walk grinning devils, barbed and hoofed;
    While high on hills of hate,
    Black-blossomed, crimson-sky'd,
    Thou sittest, dumb.

    Father Almighty!
    This earth is mad!
    Palsied, our cunning hands;
    Rotten, our gold;
    Our argosies reel and stagger
    Over empty seas;
    All the long aisles
    Of Thy Great Temples, God,
    Stink with the entrails
    Of our souls.
    And Thou art dumb.

    Above the thunder of Thy Thunders, Lord,
    Lightening Thy Lightnings,
    Rings and roars
    The dark damnation
    Of this hell of war.
    Red piles the pulp of hearts and heads
    And little children's hands.

    Allah!
    Elohim!
    Very God of God!

    Death is here!
    Dead are the living; deep--dead the dead.
    Dying are earth's unborn--
    The babes' wide eyes of genius and of joy,
    Poems and prayers, sun-glows and earth-songs,
    Great-pictured dreams,
    Enmarbled phantasies,
    High hymning heavens--all
    In this dread night
    Writhe and shriek and choke and die
    This long ghost-night--
    While Thou art dumb.

    Have mercy!
    Have mercy upon us, miserable sinners!
    Stand forth, unveil Thy Face,
    Pour down the light
    That seethes above Thy Throne,
    And blaze this devil's dance to darkness!
    Hear!
    Speak!
    In Christ's Great Name--

    I hear!
    Forgive me, God!
    Above the thunder I hearkened;
    Beneath the silence, now,--
    I hear!

    (Wait, God, a little space.
    It is so strange to talk with Thee--
    Alone!)

    This gold?
    I took it.
    Is it Thine?
    Forgive; I did not know.

    Blood? Is it wet with blood?
    'Tis from my brother's hands.
    (I know; his hands are mine.)
    It flowed for Thee, O Lord.

    War? Not so; not war--
    Dominion, Lord, and over black, not white;
    Black, brown, and fawn,
    And not Thy Chosen Brood, O God,
    We murdered.
    To build Thy Kingdom,
    To drape our wives and little ones,
    And set their souls a-glitter--
    For this we killed these lesser breeds
    And civilized their dead,
    Raping red rubber, diamonds, cocoa, gold!

    For this, too, once, and in Thy Name,
    I lynched a Nigger--

      (He raved and writhed,
       I heard him cry,
       I felt the life-light leap and lie,
       I saw him crackle there, on high,
       I watched him wither!)

    _Thou?_
    _Thee?_
    _I lynched Thee?_

    Awake me, God! I sleep!
    What was that awful word Thou saidst?
    That black and riven thing--was it Thee?
    That gasp--was it Thine?
    This pain--is it Thine?
    Are, then, these bullets piercing Thee?
    Have all the wars of all the world,
    Down all dim time, drawn blood from Thee?
    Have all the lies and thefts and hates--
    Is this Thy Crucifixion, God,
    And not that funny, little cross,
    With vinegar and thorns?
    Is this Thy kingdom here, not there,
    This stone and stucco drift of dreams?

    Help!
    I sense that low and awful cry--

    Who cries?
    Who weeps?
    With silent sob that rends and tears--
    Can God sob?

    Who prays?
    I hear strong prayers throng by,
    Like mighty winds on dusky moors--
    Can God pray?

    Prayest Thou, Lord, and to me?
    _Thou_ needest me?
    Thou _needest_ me?
    Thou needest _me_?
    Poor, wounded soul!
    Of this I never dreamed. I thought--

    _Courage, God,
    I come!_





X

THE COMET


He stood a moment on the steps of the bank, watching the human river
that swirled down Broadway. Few noticed him. Few ever noticed him save
in a way that stung. He was outside the world--"nothing!" as he said
bitterly. Bits of the words of the walkers came to him.

"The comet?"

"The comet----"

Everybody was talking of it. Even the president, as he entered, smiled
patronizingly at him, and asked:

"Well, Jim, are you scared?"

"No," said the messenger shortly.

"I thought we'd journeyed through the comet's tail once," broke in the
junior clerk affably.

"Oh, that was Halley's," said the president; "this is a new comet, quite
a stranger, they say--wonderful, wonderful! I saw it last night. Oh, by
the way, Jim," turning again to the messenger, "I want you to go down
into the lower vaults today."

The messenger followed the president silently. Of course, they wanted
_him_ to go down to the lower vaults. It was too dangerous for more
valuable men. He smiled grimly and listened.

"Everything of value has been moved out since the water began to seep
in," said the president; "but we miss two volumes of old records.
Suppose you nose around down there,--it isn't very pleasant, I suppose."

"Not very," said the messenger, as he walked out.

"Well, Jim, the tail of the new comet hits us at noon this time," said
the vault clerk, as he passed over the keys; but the messenger passed
silently down the stairs. Down he went beneath Broadway, where the dim
light filtered through the feet of hurrying men; down to the dark
basement beneath; down into the blackness and silence beneath that
lowest cavern. Here with his dark lantern he groped in the bowels of the
earth, under the world.

He drew a long breath as he threw back the last great iron door and
stepped into the fetid slime within. Here at last was peace, and he
groped moodily forward. A great rat leaped past him and cobwebs crept
across his face. He felt carefully around the room, shelf by shelf, on
the muddied floor, and in crevice and corner. Nothing. Then he went back
to the far end, where somehow the wall felt different. He sounded and
pushed and pried. Nothing. He started away. Then something brought him
back. He was sounding and working again when suddenly the whole black
wall swung as on mighty hinges, and blackness yawned beyond. He peered
in; it was evidently a secret vault--some hiding place of the old bank
unknown in newer times. He entered hesitatingly. It was a long, narrow
room with shelves, and at the far end, an old iron chest. On a high
shelf lay the two missing volumes of records, and others. He put them
carefully aside and stepped to the chest. It was old, strong, and rusty.
He looked at the vast and old-fashioned lock and flashed his light on
the hinges. They were deeply incrusted with rust. Looking about, he
found a bit of iron and began to pry. The rust had eaten a hundred
years, and it had gone deep. Slowly, wearily, the old lid lifted, and
with a last, low groan lay bare its treasure--and he saw the dull sheen
of gold!

"Boom!"

A low, grinding, reverberating crash struck upon his ear. He started up
and looked about. All was black and still. He groped for his light and
swung it about him. Then he knew! The great stone door had swung to. He
forgot the gold and looked death squarely in the face. Then with a sigh
he went methodically to work. The cold sweat stood on his forehead; but
he searched, pounded, pushed, and worked until after what seemed endless
hours his hand struck a cold bit of metal and the great door swung again
harshly on its hinges, and then, striking against something soft and
heavy, stopped. He had just room to squeeze through. There lay the body
of the vault clerk, cold and stiff. He stared at it, and then felt sick
and nauseated. The air seemed unaccountably foul, with a strong,
peculiar odor. He stepped forward, clutched at the air, and fell
fainting across the corpse.

He awoke with a sense of horror, leaped from the body, and groped up the
stairs, calling to the guard. The watchman sat as if asleep, with the
gate swinging free. With one glance at him the messenger hurried up to
the sub-vault. In vain he called to the guards. His voice echoed and
re-echoed weirdly. Up into the great basement he rushed. Here another
guard lay prostrate on his face, cold and still. A fear arose in the
messenger's heart. He dashed up to the cellar floor, up into the bank.
The stillness of death lay everywhere and everywhere bowed, bent, and
stretched the silent forms of men. The messenger paused and glanced
about. He was not a man easily moved; but the sight was appalling!
"Robbery and murder," he whispered slowly to himself as he saw the
twisted, oozing mouth of the president where he lay half-buried on his
desk. Then a new thought seized him: If they found him here alone--with
all this money and all these dead men--what would his life be worth? He
glanced about, tiptoed cautiously to a side door, and again looked
behind. Quietly he turned the latch and stepped out into Wall Street.

How silent the street was! Not a soul was stirring, and yet it was
high-noon--Wall Street? Broadway? He glanced almost wildly up and down,
then across the street, and as he looked, a sickening horror froze in
his limbs. With a choking cry of utter fright he lunged, leaned giddily
against the cold building, and stared helplessly at the sight.

In the great stone doorway a hundred men and women and children lay
crushed and twisted and jammed, forced into that great, gaping doorway
like refuse in a can--as if in one wild, frantic rush to safety, they
had rushed and ground themselves to death. Slowly the messenger crept
along the walls, wetting his parched mouth and trying to comprehend,
stilling the tremor in his limbs and the rising terror in his heart. He
met a business man, silk-hatted and frock-coated, who had crept, too,
along that smooth wall and stood now stone dead with wonder written on
his lips. The messenger turned his eyes hastily away and sought the
curb. A woman leaned wearily against the signpost, her head bowed
motionless on her lace and silken bosom. Before her stood a street car,
silent, and within--but the messenger but glanced and hurried on. A
grimy newsboy sat in the gutter with the "last edition" in his uplifted
hand: "Danger!" screamed its black headlines. "Warnings wired around the
world. The Comet's tail sweeps past us at noon. Deadly gases expected.
Close doors and windows. Seek the cellar." The messenger read and
staggered on. Far out from a window above, a girl lay with gasping face
and sleevelets on her arms. On a store step sat a little, sweet-faced
girl looking upward toward the skies, and in the carriage by her
lay--but the messenger looked no longer. The cords gave way--the terror
burst in his veins, and with one great, gasping cry he sprang
desperately forward and ran,--ran as only the frightened run, shrieking
and fighting the air until with one last wail of pain he sank on the
grass of Madison Square and lay prone and still.

When he rose, he gave no glance at the still and silent forms on the
benches, but, going to a fountain, bathed his face; then hiding himself
in a corner away from the drama of death, he quietly gripped himself and
thought the thing through: The comet had swept the earth and this was
the end. Was everybody dead? He must search and see.

He knew that he must steady himself and keep calm, or he would go
insane. First he must go to a restaurant. He walked up Fifth Avenue to a
famous hostelry and entered its gorgeous, ghost-haunted halls. He beat
back the nausea, and, seizing a tray from dead hands, hurried into the
street and ate ravenously, hiding to keep out the sights.

"Yesterday, they would not have served me," he whispered, as he forced
the food down.

Then he started up the street,--looking, peering, telephoning, ringing
alarms; silent, silent all. Was nobody--nobody--he dared not think the
thought and hurried on.

Suddenly he stopped still. He had forgotten. My God! How could he have
forgotten? He must rush to the subway--then he almost laughed. No--a
car; if he could find a Ford. He saw one. Gently he lifted off its
burden, and took his place on the seat. He tested the throttle. There
was gas. He glided off, shivering, and drove up the street. Everywhere
stood, leaned, lounged, and lay the dead, in grim and awful silence. On
he ran past an automobile, wrecked and overturned; past another, filled
with a gay party whose smiles yet lingered on their death-struck lips;
on past crowds and groups of cars, pausing by dead policemen; at 42nd
Street he had to detour to Park Avenue to avoid the dead congestion. He
came back on Fifth Avenue at 57th and flew past the Plaza and by the
park with its hushed babies and silent throng, until as he was rushing
past 72nd Street he heard a sharp cry, and saw a living form leaning
wildly out an upper window. He gasped. The human voice sounded in his
ears like the voice of God.

"Hello--hello--help, in God's name!" wailed the woman. "There's a dead
girl in here and a man and--and see yonder dead men lying in the street
and dead horses--for the love of God go and bring the officers----" And
the words trailed off into hysterical tears.

He wheeled the car in a sudden circle, running over the still body of a
child and leaping on the curb. Then he rushed up the steps and tried the
door and rang violently. There was a long pause, but at last the heavy
door swung back. They stared a moment in silence. She had not noticed
before that he was a Negro. He had not thought of her as white. She was
a woman of perhaps twenty-five--rarely beautiful and richly gowned, with
darkly-golden hair, and jewels. Yesterday, he thought with bitterness,
she would scarcely have looked at him twice. He would have been dirt
beneath her silken feet. She stared at him. Of all the sorts of men she
had pictured as coming to her rescue she had not dreamed of one like
him. Not that he was not human, but he dwelt in a world so far from
hers, so infinitely far, that he seldom even entered her thought. Yet as
she looked at him curiously he seemed quite commonplace and usual. He
was a tall, dark workingman of the better class, with a sensitive face
trained to stolidity and a poor man's clothes and hands. His face was
soft and slow and his manner at once cold and nervous, like fires long
banked, but not out.

So a moment each paused and gauged the other; then the thought of the
dead world without rushed in and they started toward each other.

"What has happened?" she cried. "Tell me! Nothing stirs. All is silence!
I see the dead strewn before my window as winnowed by the breath of
God,--and see----" She dragged him through great, silken hangings to
where, beneath the sheen of mahogany and silver, a little French maid
lay stretched in quiet, everlasting sleep, and near her a butler lay
prone in his livery.

The tears streamed down the woman's cheeks and she clung to his arm
until the perfume of her breath swept his face and he felt the tremors
racing through her body.

"I had been shut up in my dark room developing pictures of the comet
which I took last night; when I came out--I saw the dead!

"What has happened?" she cried again.

He answered slowly:

"Something--comet or devil--swept across the earth this morning
and--many are dead!"

"Many? Very many?"

"I have searched and I have seen no other living soul but you."

She gasped and they stared at each other.

"My--father!" she whispered.

"Where is he?"

"He started for the office."

"Where is it?"

"In the Metropolitan Tower."

"Leave a note for him here and come."

Then he stopped.

"No," he said firmly--"first, we must go--to Harlem."

"Harlem!" she cried. Then she understood. She tapped her foot at first
impatiently. She looked back and shuddered. Then she came resolutely
down the steps.

"There's a swifter car in the garage in the court," she said.

"I don't know how to drive it," he said.

"I do," she answered.

In ten minutes they were flying to Harlem on the wind. The Stutz rose
and raced like an airplane. They took the turn at 110th Street on two
wheels and slipped with a shriek into 135th.

He was gone but a moment. Then he returned, and his face was gray. She
did not look, but said:

"You have lost--somebody?"

"I have lost--everybody," he said, simply--"unless----"

He ran back and was gone several minutes--hours they seemed to her.

"Everybody," he said, and he walked slowly back with something film-like
in his hand which he stuffed into his pocket.

"I'm afraid I was selfish," he said. But already the car was moving
toward the park among the dark and lined dead of Harlem--the brown,
still faces, the knotted hands, the homely garments, and the
silence--the wild and haunting silence. Out of the park, and down Fifth
Avenue they whirled. In and out among the dead they slipped and
quivered, needing no sound of bell or horn, until the great, square
Metropolitan Tower hove in sight. Gently he laid the dead elevator boy
aside; the car shot upward. The door of the office stood open. On the
threshold lay the stenographer, and, staring at her, sat the dead clerk.
The inner office was empty, but a note lay on the desk, folded and
addressed but unsent:

     Dear Daughter:

     I've gone for a hundred mile spin in Fred's new Mercedes. Shall not
     be back before dinner. I'll bring Fred with me.

     J.B.H.

"Come," she cried nervously. "We must search the city."

Up and down, over and across, back again--on went that ghostly search.
Everywhere was silence and death--death and silence! They hunted from
Madison Square to Spuyten Duyvel; they rushed across the Williamsburg
Bridge; they swept over Brooklyn; from the Battery and Morningside
Heights they scanned the river. Silence, silence everywhere, and no
human sign. Haggard and bedraggled they puffed a third time slowly down
Broadway, under the broiling sun, and at last stopped. He sniffed the
air. An odor--a smell--and with the shifting breeze a sickening stench
filled their nostrils and brought its awful warning. The girl settled
back helplessly in her seat.

"What can we do?" she cried.

It was his turn now to take the lead, and he did it quickly.

"The long distance telephone--the telegraph and the cable--night rockets
and then--flight!"

She looked at him now with strength and confidence. He did not look like
men, as she had always pictured men; but he acted like one and she was
content. In fifteen minutes they were at the central telephone exchange.
As they came to the door he stepped quickly before her and pressed her
gently back as he closed it. She heard him moving to and fro, and knew
his burdens--the poor, little burdens he bore. When she entered, he was
alone in the room. The grim switchboard flashed its metallic face in
cryptic, sphinx-like immobility. She seated herself on a stool and
donned the bright earpiece. She looked at the mouthpiece. She had never
looked at one so closely before. It was wide and black, pimpled with
usage; inert; dead; almost sarcastic in its unfeeling curves. It
looked--she beat back the thought--but it looked,--it persisted in
looking like--she turned her head and found herself alone. One moment
she was terrified; then she thanked him silently for his delicacy and
turned resolutely, with a quick intaking of breath.

"Hello!" she called in low tones. She was calling to the world. The
world _must_ answer. Would the world _answer_? Was the world----

Silence!

She had spoken too low.

"Hello!" she cried, full-voiced.

She listened. Silence! Her heart beat quickly. She cried in clear,
distinct, loud tones: "Hello--hello--hello!"

What was that whirring? Surely--no--was it the click of a receiver?

She bent close, she moved the pegs in the holes, and called and called,
until her voice rose almost to a shriek, and her heart hammered. It was
as if she had heard the last flicker of creation, and the evil was
silence. Her voice dropped to a sob. She sat stupidly staring into the
black and sarcastic mouthpiece, and the thought came again. Hope lay
dead within her. Yes, the cable and the rockets remained; but the
world--she could not frame the thought or say the word. It was too
mighty--too terrible! She turned toward the door with a new fear in her
heart. For the first time she seemed to realize that she was alone in
the world with a stranger, with something more than a stranger,--with a
man alien in blood and culture--unknown, perhaps unknowable. It was
awful! She must escape--she must fly; he must not see her again. Who
knew what awful thoughts--

She gathered her silken skirts deftly about her young, smooth
limbs--listened, and glided into a sidehall. A moment she shrank back:
the hall lay filled with dead women; then she leaped to the door and
tore at it, with bleeding fingers, until it swung wide. She looked out.
He was standing at the top of the alley,--silhouetted, tall and black,
motionless. Was he looking at her or away? She did not know--she did not
care. She simply leaped and ran--ran until she found herself alone amid
the dead and the tall ramparts of towering buildings.

She stopped. She was alone. Alone! Alone on the streets--alone in the
city--perhaps alone in the world! There crept in upon her the sense of
deception--of creeping hands behind her back--of silent, moving things
she could not see,--of voices hushed in fearsome conspiracy. She looked
behind and sideways, started at strange sounds and heard still stranger,
until every nerve within her stood sharp and quivering, stretched to
scream at the barest touch. She whirled and flew back, whimpering like a
child, until she found that narrow alley again and the dark, silent
figure silhouetted at the top. She stopped and rested; then she walked
silently toward him, looked at him timidly; but he said nothing as he
handed her into the car. Her voice caught as she whispered:

"Not--that."

And he answered slowly: "No--not that!"

They climbed into the car. She bent forward on the wheel and sobbed,
with great, dry, quivering sobs, as they flew toward the cable office on
the east side, leaving the world of wealth and prosperity for the world
of poverty and work. In the world behind them were death and silence,
grave and grim, almost cynical, but always decent; here it was hideous.
It clothed itself in every ghastly form of terror, struggle, hate, and
suffering. It lay wreathed in crime and squalor, greed and lust. Only in
its dread and awful silence was it like to death everywhere.

Yet as the two, flying and alone, looked upon the horror of the world,
slowly, gradually, the sense of all-enveloping death deserted them. They
seemed to move in a world silent and asleep,--not dead. They moved in
quiet reverence, lest somehow they wake these sleeping forms who had, at
last, found peace. They moved in some solemn, world-wide _Friedhof_,
above which some mighty arm had waved its magic wand. All nature slept
until--until, and quick with the same startling thought, they looked
into each other's eyes--he, ashen, and she, crimson, with unspoken
thought. To both, the vision of a mighty beauty--of vast, unspoken
things, swelled in their souls; but they put it away.

Great, dark coils of wire came up from the earth and down from the sun
and entered this low lair of witchery. The gathered lightnings of the
world centered here, binding with beams of light the ends of the earth.
The doors gaped on the gloom within. He paused on the threshold.

"Do you know the code?" she asked.

"I know the call for help--we used it formerly at the bank."

She hardly heard. She heard the lapping of the waters far below,--the
dark and restless waters--the cold and luring waters, as they called. He
stepped within. Slowly she walked to the wall, where the water called
below, and stood and waited. Long she waited, and he did not come. Then
with a start she saw him, too, standing beside the black waters. Slowly
he removed his coat and stood there silently. She walked quickly to him
and laid her hand on his arm. He did not start or look. The waters
lapped on in luring, deadly rhythm. He pointed down to the waters, and
said quietly:

"The world lies beneath the waters now--may I go?"

She looked into his stricken, tired face, and a great pity surged within
her heart. She answered in a voice clear and calm, "No."

Upward they turned toward life again, and he seized the wheel. The
world was darkening to twilight, and a great, gray pall was falling
mercifully and gently on the sleeping dead. The ghastly glare of reality
seemed replaced with the dream of some vast romance. The girl lay
silently back, as the motor whizzed along, and looked half-consciously
for the elf-queen to wave life into this dead world again. She forgot to
wonder at the quickness with which he had learned to drive her car. It
seemed natural. And then as they whirled and swung into Madison Square
and at the door of the Metropolitan Tower she gave a low cry, and her
eyes were great! Perhaps she had seen the elf-queen?

The man led her to the elevator of the tower and deftly they ascended.
In her father's office they gathered rugs and chairs, and he wrote a
note and laid it on the desk; then they ascended to the roof and he made
her comfortable. For a while she rested and sank to dreamy somnolence,
watching the worlds above and wondering. Below lay the dark shadows of
the city and afar was the shining of the sea. She glanced at him timidly
as he set food before her and took a shawl and wound her in it, touching
her reverently, yet tenderly. She looked up at him with thankfulness in
her eyes, eating what he served. He watched the city. She watched him.
He seemed very human,--very near now.

"Have you had to work hard?" she asked softly.

"Always," he said.

"I have always been idle," she said. "I was rich."

"I was poor," he almost echoed.

"The rich and the poor are met together," she began, and he finished:

"The Lord is the Maker of them all."

"Yes," she said slowly; "and how foolish our human distinctions
seem--now," looking down to the great dead city stretched below,
swimming in unlightened shadows.

"Yes--I was not--human, yesterday," he said.

She looked at him. "And your people were not my people," she said; "but
today----" She paused. He was a man,--no more; but he was in some larger
sense a gentleman,--sensitive, kindly, chivalrous, everything save his
hands and--his face. Yet yesterday----

"Death, the leveler!" he muttered.

"And the revealer," she whispered gently, rising to her feet with great
eyes. He turned away, and after fumbling a moment sent a rocket into the
darkening air. It arose, shrieked, and flew up, a slim path of light,
and scattering its stars abroad, dropped on the city below. She scarcely
noticed it. A vision of the world had risen before her. Slowly the
mighty prophecy of her destiny overwhelmed her. Above the dead past
hovered the Angel of Annunciation. She was no mere woman. She was
neither high nor low, white nor black, rich nor poor. She was primal
woman; mighty mother of all men to come and Bride of Life. She looked
upon the man beside her and forgot all else but his manhood, his strong,
vigorous manhood--his sorrow and sacrifice. She saw him glorified. He
was no longer a thing apart, a creature below, a strange outcast of
another clime and blood, but her Brother Humanity incarnate, Son of God
and great All-Father of the race to be.

He did not glimpse the glory in her eyes, but stood looking outward
toward the sea and sending rocket after rocket into the unanswering
darkness. Dark-purple clouds lay banked and billowed in the west. Behind
them and all around, the heavens glowed in dim, weird radiance that
suffused the darkening world and made almost a minor music. Suddenly, as
though gathered back in some vast hand, the great cloud-curtain fell
away. Low on the horizon lay a long, white star--mystic, wonderful! And
from it fled upward to the pole, like some wan bridal veil, a pale, wide
sheet of flame that lighted all the world and dimmed the stars.

In fascinated silence the man gazed at the heavens and dropped his
rockets to the floor. Memories of memories stirred to life in the dead
recesses of his mind. The shackles seemed to rattle and fall from his
soul. Up from the crass and crushing and cringing of his caste leaped
the lone majesty of kings long dead. He arose within the shadows, tall,
straight, and stern, with power in his eyes and ghostly scepters
hovering to his grasp. It was as though some mighty Pharaoh lived again,
or curled Assyrian lord. He turned and looked upon the lady, and found
her gazing straight at him.

Silently, immovably, they saw each other face to face--eye to eye. Their
souls lay naked to the night. It was not lust; it was not love--it was
some vaster, mightier thing that needed neither touch of body nor thrill
of soul. It was a thought divine, splendid.

Slowly, noiselessly, they moved toward each other--the heavens above,
the seas around, the city grim and dead below. He loomed from out the
velvet shadows vast and dark. Pearl-white and slender, she shone beneath
the stars. She stretched her jeweled hands abroad. He lifted up his
mighty arms, and they cried each to the other, almost with one voice,
"The world is dead."

"Long live the----"

"Honk! Honk!" Hoarse and sharp the cry of a motor drifted clearly up
from the silence below. They started backward with a cry and gazed upon
each other with eyes that faltered and fell, with blood that boiled.

"Honk! Honk! Honk! Honk!" came the mad cry again, and almost from their
feet a rocket blazed into the air and scattered its stars upon them. She
covered her eyes with her hands, and her shoulders heaved. He dropped
and bowed, groped blindly on his knees about the floor. A blue flame
spluttered lazily after an age, and she heard the scream of an answering
rocket as it flew.

Then they stood still as death, looking to opposite ends of the earth.

"Clang--crash--clang!"

The roar and ring of swift elevators shooting upward from below made the
great tower tremble. A murmur and babel of voices swept in upon the
night. All over the once dead city the lights blinked, flickered, and
flamed; and then with a sudden clanging of doors the entrance to the
platform was filled with men, and one with white and flying hair rushed
to the girl and lifted her to his breast. "My daughter!" he sobbed.

Behind him hurried a younger, comelier man, carefully clad in motor
costume, who bent above the girl with passionate solicitude and gazed
into her staring eyes until they narrowed and dropped and her face
flushed deeper and deeper crimson.

"Julia," he whispered; "my darling, I thought you were gone forever."

She looked up at him with strange, searching eyes.

"Fred," she murmured, almost vaguely, "is the world--gone?"

"Only New York," he answered; "it is terrible--awful! You know,--but
you, how did you escape--how have you endured this horror? Are you well?
Unharmed?"

"Unharmed!" she said.

"And this man here?" he asked, encircling her drooping form with one arm
and turning toward the Negro. Suddenly he stiffened and his hand flew to
his hip. "Why!" he snarled. "It's--a--nigger--Julia! Has he--has he
dared----"

She lifted her head and looked at her late companion curiously and then
dropped her eyes with a sigh.

"He has dared--all, to rescue me," she said quietly, "and I--thank
him--much." But she did not look at him again. As the couple turned
away, the father drew a roll of bills from his pockets.

"Here, my good fellow," he said, thrusting the money into the man's
hands, "take that,--what's your name?"

"Jim Davis," came the answer, hollow-voiced.

"Well, Jim, I thank you. I've always liked your people. If you ever want
a job, call on me." And they were gone.

The crowd poured up and out of the elevators, talking and whispering.

"Who was it?"

"Are they alive?"

"How many?"

"Two!"

"Who was saved?"

"A white girl and a nigger--there she goes."

"A nigger? Where is he? Let's lynch the damned----"

"Shut up--he's all right-he saved her."

"Saved hell! He had no business----"

"Here he comes."

Into the glare of the electric lights the colored man moved slowly, with
the eyes of those that walk and sleep.

"Well, what do you think of that?" cried a bystander; "of all New York,
just a white girl and a nigger!"

The colored man heard nothing. He stood silently beneath the glare of
the light, gazing at the money in his hand and shrinking as he gazed;
slowly he put his other hand into his pocket and brought out a baby's
filmy cap, and gazed again. A woman mounted to the platform and looked
about, shading her eyes. She was brown, small, and toil-worn, and in one
arm lay the corpse of a dark baby. The crowd parted and her eyes fell on
the colored man; with a cry she tottered toward him.

"Jim!"

He whirled and, with a sob of joy, caught her in his arms.




_A Hymn to the Peoples_


    O Truce of God!
    And primal meeting of the Sons of Man,
    Foreshadowing the union of the World!
    From all the ends of earth we come!
    Old Night, the elder sister of the Day,
    Mother of Dawn in the golden East,
    Meets in the misty twilight with her brood,
    Pale and black, tawny, red and brown,
    The mighty human rainbow of the world,
    Spanning its wilderness of storm.

    Softly in sympathy the sunlight falls,
    Rare is the radiance of the moon;
    And on the darkest midnight blaze the stars--
    The far-flown shadows of whose brilliance
    Drop like a dream on the dim shores of Time,
    Forecasting Days that are to these
    As day to night.

    So sit we all as one.
    So, gloomed in tall and stone-swathed groves,
    The Buddha walks with Christ!
    And Al-Koran and Bible both be holy!

    Almighty Word!
    In this Thine awful sanctuary,
    First and flame-haunted City of the Widened World,
    Assoil us, Lord of Lands and Seas!

    We are but weak and wayward men,
    Distraught alike with hatred and vainglory;
    Prone to despise the Soul that breathes within--
    High visioned hordes that lie and steal and kill,
    Sinning the sin each separate heart disclaims,
    Clambering upon our riven, writhing selves,
    Besieging Heaven by trampling men to Hell!
    We be blood-guilty! Lo, our hands be red!
    Not one may blame the other in this sin!
    But here--here in the white Silence of the Dawn,
    Before the Womb of Time,
    With bowed hearts all flame and shame,
    We face the birth-pangs of a world:
    We hear the stifled cry of Nations all but born--
    The wail of women ravished of their stunted brood!
    We see the nakedness of Toil, the poverty of Wealth,
    We know the Anarchy of Empire, and doleful Death of Life!
    And hearing, seeing, knowing all, we cry:

    Save us, World-Spirit, from our lesser selves!
    Grant us that war and hatred cease,
    Reveal our souls in every race and hue!
    Help us, O Human God, in this Thy Truce,
    To make Humanity divine!

  The Negro in the South

  _His Economic Progress in Relation to
  His Moral and Religious Development_

  The Letter Establishing the Lectureship


Bishop Whitaker presented the Letter of Endowment of the Lectureship
on Christian Sociology from Rev. William L. Bull as follows:

For many years it has been my earnest desire to found a Lectureship on
Christian Sociology, meaning thereby the application of Christian
principles to the Social, Industrial, and Economic problems of the
time, in my Alma Mater, the Philadelphia Divinity School. My object in
founding this Lectureship is to secure the free, frank, and full
consideration of these subjects, with special reference to the
Christian aspects of the question involved, which have heretofore, in
my opinion, been too much neglected in such discussion. It would seem
that the time is now ripe and the moment an auspicious one for the
establishment of this Lectureship, at least tentatively.

After a trial of three years, I again make the offer, as in my letter
of January 1, 1901, to continue these Lectures for a period of three
years, with the hope that they may excite such an interest,
particularly among the undergraduates of the Divinity School, that I
shall be justified, with the approval of the authorities of the
Divinity School, in placing the Lectureship on a more permanent
foundation.

I herewith pledge myself to contribute the sum of six hundred dollars
annually, for a period of three years, to the payment of a lecturer on
Christian Sociology, whose duty it shall be to deliver a course of not
less than four lectures to the students of the Divinity School,
either at the school or elsewhere, as may be deemed most advisable, on
the application of Christian principles to the Social, Industrial, and
Economic problems and needs of the times; the said lecturer to be
appointed annually by a committee of five members: the Bishop of the
Diocese of Pennsylvania; the Dean of the Divinity School; a member of
the Board of Overseers, who shall at the same time be an Alumnus; and
two others, one of whom shall be myself and the other chosen by the
preceding four members of the committee.

Furthermore, if it shall be deemed desirable that the Lectures shall
be published, I pledge myself to the additional payment of from one to
two hundred dollars for such purpose.

To secure a full, frank, and free consideration of the questions
involved, it is my desire that the opportunity shall be given from
time to time to the representatives of each school of economic thought
to express their views in these Lectures.

The only restriction I wish placed on the lecturer is that he shall be
a believer in the moral teachings and principles of the Christian
Religion as the true solvent of our Social, Industrial, and Economic
problems. Of course, it is my intention that a new lecturer shall be
appointed by the committee each year, who shall deliver the course of
Lectures for the ensuing year.

                                               WILLIAM LEVI BULL.




Contents


    I. THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OF THE NEGRO RACE IN SLAVERY    7
       _By Booker T. Washington_

   II. THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OF THE NEGRO RACE SINCE ITS
       EMANCIPATION                                            43
       _By Booker T. Washington_

  III. THE ECONOMIC REVOLUTION IN THE SOUTH                    77
       _By W.E. Burghardt DuBois_

   IV. RELIGION IN THE SOUTH                                  123
       _By W.E. Burghardt DuBois_

       NOTES TO CHAPTERS III AND IV                           193




       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPTER I

THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OF THE NEGRO RACE IN SLAVERY

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER I

THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OF THE NEGRO RACE IN SLAVERY


We are now, I think, far enough removed from the period of slavery to
be able to study the influence of that institution objectively rather
than subjectively. Surely if any Negro who was a part of the
institution itself can do so, the remaining portion of the American
people ought to be able to do so, whether they live at the North or at
the South.

My subject naturally leads me to a discussion of the Negro as he was
in slavery. We must all acknowledge, whatever else resulted from
slavery that, first of all, it was the economic element involved that
brought the Negro to America, and it was largely this consideration
that held the race in slavery for a period of about 245 years. But,
in this discussion, I am not to consider the economic value of the
Negro as a slave, as such, but only the influence of his industrial
training while in slavery in the development of his moral and
religious life.

In my opinion, it requires no little effort on the part of a man who
was once himself a slave to be able to admit this. If any Negro who
was a part of the institution of slavery itself can so far rid himself
of the prejudices of the same, it seems to me other people, living in
whatever section, should be able to do so.

I have been a slave once in my life--a slave in body. But I long since
resolved that no inducement and no influence would ever make me a
slave in soul, in my love for humanity, and in my search for truth.

At the same time slaves were being brought to the shores of Virginia
from their native land, Africa, the woods of Virginia were swarming
with thousands of another dark-skinned race. The question naturally
arises: Why did the importers of Negro slaves go to the trouble and
expense of going thousands of miles for a dark-skinned people to hew
wood and draw water for the whites, when they had right among them a
people of another race who could have answered the purpose? The answer
is that the Indian was tried and found wanting in the commercial
qualities which the Negro seemed to possess. The Indian, as a race,
would not submit to slavery and in those instances where he was tried,
as a slave, his labor was not profitable and he was found unable to
stand the physical strain of slavery. As a slave, the Indian died in
large numbers. This was true in San Domingo and in other parts of the
American continent.

The two races, the Indian and the Negro, have been often compared to
the disadvantage of the Negro. It is often said of the Negro that he
is an imitative race. That, in a large degree, is true. That element
has its disadvantages and it also has its advantages. Very often the
Negro imitates the worst element in the white man; on the other hand I
believe that the masses of our people imitate the best they find in
the white man.

I have said more than once that one of the unfortunate conditions of
the Negro in the North is that,--because of the large proportion of
our people who are in menial service, their duties bring them in
contact with the worst. They, for example, are waiters in clubs and in
various organizations, and being engaged in that capacity makes it
necessary for them to touch the white man at his weakest point. In the
city of Philadelphia, there are hundreds, I do not suppose I should
exaggerate if I were to say thousands, who are serving the white man
as a waiter in some club or similar organization. When that white man
was at work in his factory, in his counting-room, in his bank, he was
far removed from him. When he was at his best the Negro did not come
into touch with him. In the evening when he lays aside the working
dress, takes matters easy, and gets his cigar and perhaps champagne,
the Negro comes into contact with him, not to an advantage, but at his
weakest point rather than at his strongest.

In the South, as in most parts of America, during slavery and after,
the Negro has gotten something from the white man that has made him
more valuable as a citizen. In most cases he imitates the best rather
than the worst. For example, you never see a Negro braiding his hair
in the same way as a Chinaman braids his, but he cuts his like the
white man. The Negro is seeking out the highest and best as to
quality.

It has been more than once stated that the Indian proved himself the
superior race in not submitting to slavery. We shall see about this.
In this respect it may be that the Indian secured a temporary
advantage in so far as race feeling or prejudice is concerned; I mean
by this that he escaped the badge of servitude which has fastened
itself upon the Negro,--not only upon the Negro in America, but upon
that race wherever found, for the known commercial value of the Negro
has made him a subject of traffic in other portions of the globe
during many centuries.

The Indian refused to submit to bondage and to learn the white man's
ways. The result is that the greater portion of the American Indians
have disappeared, the greater portion of those who remain are not
civilized. The Negro, wiser and more enduring than the Indian,
patiently endured slavery; and contact with the white man has given
him a civilization vastly superior to that of the Indian.

The Indian and the Negro met on the American continent for the first
time at Jamestown, in 1619. Both were in the darkest barbarism. There
were twenty Negroes and thousands of Indians. At the present time
there are between nine and ten million Negroes and two hundred and
eighty-four thousand and seventy-nine Indians. The annual tax upon the
Government on account of the Indian is $14,236,078.71 (1905); the cost
from 1789 to 1902, inclusive, reached the sum of $389,282,361.00. The
one in this case not only decreased in numbers and failed to add
anything to the economic value of his country, but has actually proven
a charge upon the state.

The Negro seems to be about the only race that has been able to look
the white man in the face during the long period of years and
live--not only live, but multiply. The Negro has not only done this,
but he has had the good sense to get something from the white man at
every point where he has touched him--something that has made him a
stronger and a better race.

Let me say in the beginning that nothing which I shall say should be
taken as an endorsement of the enslavement of my race. The experience
of the world's civilization teaches that the final and net result of
slavery is bad--bad for the enslaved, and perhaps worse for the
enslaver. If permitted a choice, I think I should prefer being the
first to being the last. But in the case of the Negro in America no
one, willing to be frank and fair, can fail to see that the Negro did
get certain benefits out of slavery; at the same time he was, as I
have stated, harmed. But in this connection we must deal with the
facts and not with prejudice, either for or against the race.

Let me make this statement with which you may or may not agree: In my
opinion, there cannot be found in the civilized or uncivilized world
ten millions of Negroes whose economic, educational, moral and
religious life is so advanced as that of the ten millions of Negroes
within the United States. If this statement be true, let us find the
cause thereof, especially as regards the Negro's moral and Christian
growth. In doing so, let credit be given wherever it is due, whether
to the Northern white man, the Southern white man, or the Negro
himself. If, as stated, the ten millions of black people in the United
States have excelled all the other groups of their race-type in moral
and Christian growth, let us trace the cause, and in doing so we may
get some light and information that will be of value in dealing with
the Negro race in America and elsewhere, and in elevating and
Christianizing other races.

In order to determine the influence of economic or industrial training
upon the moral and Christian life of the Negro, we must begin with
slavery and trace the development of the black man, noticing in a
brief manner his development through slavery to freedom, and to the
present time.

This involves, then, the period of slavery, and the period of
freedom. To begin with, let me repeat that at first, at least, the
underlying object of slavery was an economic, and an industrial one.
The climatic and other new conditions required that the slave should
wear clothing, a thing, for the most part, new to him. It has perhaps
already occurred to you that one of the conditions requisite for the
Christian life is clothing. So far as I know, Christianity is the only
religion that makes the wearing of clothes one of its conditions. A
naked Christian is impossible--and I may add that I have little faith
in a hungry Christian.

Some years ago we were holding the Tuskeegee Annual Negro Conference,
and I remember on several occasions there was one old fellow who tried
to get the floor without success. He tried continually to get
recognition from the chair, and, finally, was recognized. He said:
"Mr. Washington, we's making great progress in our community. It is
not the same as it used to be. We's making great progress. We's
getting to the point where nearly all the people in my community owns
their own pigs." I asked him why he was so much interested in his
neighbors owning their own pigs. He said: "I feel that when all my
neighbors own their own pigs, I can always sleep better every night."
There is a good deal of philosophy underlying that remark.

The economic element not only made it necessary that the Negro slave
should be clothed for the sake of decency and in order to preserve his
health, but the same considerations made it necessary that he be
housed and taught the comforts to be found in a home. Within a few
months, then, after the arrival of the Negro in America, he was
wearing clothes and living in a house--no inconsiderable step in the
direction of morality and Christianity. True, the Negro slave had worn
some kind of garment and occupied some kind of hut before he was
brought to America, but he had made little progress in the improvement
of his garments or in the kind of hut he inhabited. As we shall
perhaps see later, his introduction into American slavery was the
beginning of real growth in the two directions under consideration.

There is another important element. In his native country, owing to
climatic conditions, and also because of his few simple and crude
wants, the Negro, before coming to America, had little necessity to
labor. You have, perhaps, read the story, that it is said might be
true in certain portions of Africa, of how the native simply lies down
on his back under a banana-tree and falls asleep with his mouth open.
The banana falls into his mouth while he is asleep and when he wakes
up he finds that all he has to do is to chew it--he has his meal
already served.

Notwithstanding the fact that, in most cases, the element of
compulsion entered into the labor of the slave, and the main object
sought was the enrichment of the owner, the American Negro had, under
the regime of slavery, his first lesson in anything like continuous,
progressive, systematic labor. I have said that two of the signs of
Christianity are clothes and houses, and now I add a third, "work."

In the early days of slavery the labor performed by the slave was
naturally of a crude and primitive kind. With the growth of
civilization came a demand for a higher kind of labor, hence the Negro
slave was soon demanded as a skilled laborer, as well as for ordinary
farm and common labor. It soon became evident that from an economic
point of view it paid to give the Negro just as high a degree of skill
as possible--the more skill, the more dollars. When an ordinary slave
sold for, say seven hundred dollars, a skilled mechanic would easily
bring on the auction block from fourteen hundred to two thousand
dollars. It is strangely true that when a black man would bring two
thousand dollars a white man would not bring fifty cents.

As the slave grew in the direction of skilled labor, he was given an
increased amount of freedom. This was practiced by some owners to such
an extent that the skilled mechanic was permitted to "hire" his own
time, working where and for whom he pleased, and for what wage, on
condition that he pay his owner so much per month or year, as agreed
upon. Not a few masters found that this policy paid better than the
one of close personal supervision; many female slaves were trained not
only in ordinary house duties, but on every large plantation there was
at least one high class seamstress.

I have made a search but have not yet been able to find a single case
of abuse of confidence, and the policy to which I have referred was
practiced very largely in Virginia and especially in West
Virginia--the policy of permitting those slaves who were skilled
laborers to work for whom they pleased, on condition that they pay
their masters a fixed sum each month or each year. I have never yet
heard of a single case of failure at the end of the month or at the
end of the year to bring and place in his master's hands the
stipulated sum of money.

A discussion of this subject calls to mind one of those curious
changes in public opinion and custom with regard to races which often
occur in the United States. At the period to which I am now referring,
a great number of the Negroes in the South were compelled to follow a
trade, and they seem to have no difficulty in pursuing trades there
to-day. In the North where the agitation for the Negro's freedom
began, it is in most cases difficult, and often impossible, for a
black man to find an opportunity to work at any kind of skilled labor.
I sometimes wonder which man is the greater sinner,--the man who by
force compels the Negro to work without pay, or the man who by
physical force and through the force of public sentiment prevents the
Negro from working for him, when he is ready, willing, and fit to do
so.

I do not overstate the matter when I say that I am quite sure that in
one county in the South during the days of slavery there were more
colored youths being taught trades than there are members of my race
now being taught trades in any of the larger cities of the North.

Before I go further, I ought, in justice, to add that as slavery
spread and the owners came to know their slaves better, there appeared
in nearly every section of the South, especially in Virginia and South
Carolina, a considerable number of slave-holders who rose above the
mere idea of economic and selfish gain; and thus, through the medium
of slavery, the opportunity to train the Negro in morality and
Christianity presented itself in many sections of the South. During
the days of slavery regular religious services were provided for the
slaves, the same minister who served the white congregation preached
to the blacks. In some of the most aristocratic families, the Negro
children were taught in the Sunday-school; this was true of the Lees
and Jacksons of Virginia, and of the family of Bishop Capers and other
men of that type in South Carolina.

At the end of the period of slavery, about two hundred and fifty
years, the Negro race as a whole had learned, as I have stated, to
wear clothes, to live in a home, to work with a reasonable degree of
regularity and system, and a few had learned to work with a high
degree of skill. Not only this, the race had reached the point where,
from speaking scores of dialects, it had learned to speak
intelligently the English language. It had also a fair knowledge of
American civilization and had changed from a pagan into a Christian
race. Further, at the beginning of his freedom, the Negro found
himself in possession of--in fact had a monopoly of--the common and
skilled labor throughout the South; not only this, but, by reason of
the contact of whites and blacks during slavery, the Negro found
business and commercial careers open to him at the beginning of his
freedom.

Such conditions were unusual in the case of a race that had been
occupying so low a place in the civilization of another people. They
resulted from the fact that in slavery when the master wanted a pair
of shoes made, he went to the Negro shoemaker for those shoes; when he
wanted a suit of clothes, he went to the Negro tailor for those
clothes; and when he wanted a house built, he consulted the Negro
carpenter and mason about the plans and cost--thus the two races
learned to do business with each other. It was an easy step from this
to a higher plane of business, hence immediately after the war the
Negro found that he could become a dry goods merchant, a grocery
merchant, start a bank, go into real estate dealing, and secure the
trade not only of his own people, but also of the white man, who was
glad to do business with him and thought nothing of it.

In my own town of Tuskeegee there is a colored merchant who, not
excepting any other merchant, has the largest trade in that county in
retail groceries, and in a recent conversation with him he said that
for thirty-five years his customers had been among the best white
families of the county. More than a dozen times have I met the man who
owned this Negro in the days of slavery and he expressed himself as
more than pleased that his former slave had attained the honor of
being the most successful grocery dealer in the town of Tuskeegee.

You would be surprised, if you were to inquire into the facts, to
know how the Negro has grown in this direction. In the Southern states
there are one hundred and fifteen drug stores owned by Negroes. In
Anniston, Alabama, there are two large drug stores owned by black
people, and in one section a wholesale drug store owned and operated
successfully by a black man. The Negro who to-day owns and operates
that large wholesale drug store, selling drugs to the white as well as
colored retail druggists, was a slave, I think, until he was twelve or
fifteen years of age. It is interesting to know that more banks have
been organized in the last three years in the state of Mississippi
than ever before. There have been ten banks organized since Vardaman
became governor of the state.

For the reasons I have mentioned, the Negro in the South has not only
found a practically free field in the commercial world, but in the
world of skilled labor. Such a field is not open to him in such a
degree in any other part of the United States, or perhaps in the
world, as is open in the South. All of this has had a tremendously
strong bearing in developing the Negro's moral and Christian life.

In proportion to their numbers, I question whether so large a
proportion of any other race are members of some Christian Church as
is true of the American Negro. In many cases their practical ideas of
Christianity are crude, and their daily practice of religion is far
from satisfactory; still the foundation is laid, upon which can be
builded a rational, practical and helpful Christian life.

Let me illustrate the value of the economic and industrial training of
the Negro: If one chooses, let him try this plan which I have tried on
a good many occasions. Go into any village or town, North or South,
enter their Baptist and Methodist churches--for the most part they
belong to the Baptist Church--and ask their pastors to point out to
you the most reliable, progressive and leading colored man in the
community, the man who is most given to putting his religious
teachings into practice in his daily life, and in a majority of cases
one will have pointed out to him a Negro who learned a trade or got
some special economic training during the days of slavery,--in all
probability an individual who has become the owner of a little piece
of land, who lives in his own house.

Now what lessons for the work that is before us can you and I learn
from what I have attempted to say? The lesson suggested in the
elevation of the black race in America will apply with equal force, in
my opinion, to the inculcating of moral and Christian principles into
_any_ race, regardless of color, that is in the same relative stage of
civilization. Here let me add that in all my advocacy of the value of
industrial training I have never done so because my people are black;
I would advocate the same kind of training for any race that is on
the same plane of civilization as our people are found on at the
present time.

But as to the lesson which may prove of direct interest, so far as you
are concerned. In the old days, the method of converting the heathen
to Christianity was very largely abstract. The Bible was, in most
cases, the only argument. In the conversion of the heathen to
Christianity or in raising the standard of moral and Christian living
for any people, I argue that in the use of the economic element and
the teaching of the industries we should be guided by the same rules
that are now used in the most advanced methods of ordinary
school-teaching--that is, to begin with the known and gradually
advance to the unknown; we should advance from the concrete to the
abstract. In doing this, industrial education, it seems to me,
furnishes a tremendously good opportunity.

Let me illustrate: Not long ago a missionary who was going into a
foreign field very kindly asked of me advice as to how he should
proceed to convert the people to Christianity. I asked him, first,
upon what the people depended mostly for a living in the country where
he was to labor; he replied that for the most part they were engaged
in sheep raising. I said to him at once that if I were going into that
country as a missionary, I should begin my efforts by teaching the
people to raise more sheep and better sheep. If he could convince them
that Christianity could raise more sheep and better sheep than
paganism, he would at once get a hold upon their sympathy and
confidence in a way he could not do by following more abstract methods
of converting them.

The average man can discern more quickly the difference between good
sheep and bad sheep, than he can the difference between Unitarianism
and Trinitarianism.

If the Christian missionary can gradually teach the heathen how to
build a better house than he has used, how to make better clothes, how
to grow, prepare and secure better food for his daily meals, the
missionary will have gone a long way, may I repeat, toward securing
the confidence of the heathen and will have laid the foundation in
this concrete manner for interesting the pagan in a higher moral life
and in getting him to appreciate the difference between the heathen
life and the Christian life. In teaching the child to read we use the
objective method; in converting the heathen we should employ the same
method--and this means the economic or industrial method.

Some six years ago a group of Tuskeegee graduates and former students
went to Africa for the purpose of giving the natives in a certain
territory of West Africa training in methods of raising American
cotton. They did not go there primarily as missionaries, nor was their
chief end the conversion of these pagans to Christianity. Naturally,
they began their work by training the natives how to cultivate their
land differently, how and when to plant the crop, and when to harvest
it, and gradually taught them how to use a small hand gin in getting
the cotton ready for market.

Largely through the leadership of this group of Tuskeegee students,
there is shipped from this section of Africa to the Berlin market each
year many bales of cotton. The natives have learned through the
teaching of these men to grow more cotton and better cotton. They have
learned to use their time, have learned that by working systematically
and regularly they can increase their income and thus add to their
independence and supply their wants. Not only this, but in order that
these people might be fitted for continuous and regular service in the
cotton field, their houses have been improved and the natives have
been taught how to take better care of their bodies. In a word,
during the years that these Tuskeegee people have been in the
community they have improved the entire economic, industrial, and
physical life of the people in this immediate territory.

The result is, as one of the men stated on his last visit to
Tuskeegee, there is little difficulty now in getting the children of
these people to attend Sunday-school and the older people to attend
church; in fact, in a natural, logical manner they seem to have been
converted to the idea that the religion practiced by these Tuskeegee
men is superior to their own. They believe this firmly, because they
have seen that better results have been produced through the Christian
influence of these Tuskeegee men than has been produced when they had
no such leadership. If these Tuskeegee people had gone there as
missionaries of the old type and had confined themselves to abstract
teachings of the Bible alone, it would have required many years to
have brought about the results which have been attained within a few
years.

Some time ago in Montgomery, Alabama, there was a church, attended by
members of my race, which happened to be located not very far from the
residence of a white family. The cook who served in this white family
attended this church to which I refer. The members of the church made
considerable noise in their singing, shouting, and praying, and after
a while the white family grew rather exasperated because of this
noise. One Sunday the church services were prolonged until an unusual
hour and there was more noise than usual; so the next morning when the
cook came, the lady of the house called her into the sitting-room, and
said: "Jane, why in the world do you make so much noise in your
worship, in your singing, praying, and shouting? Why don't you be
orderly, quiet, and systematic in your worship? Why, Jane, in the
Bible we read that in the building of Solomon's Temple, no noise
pervaded the silence of the builders. Why can you not worship in the
same way?" The old colored woman looked at her mistress for a few
moments and said: "Lordy, missus, you don't know what we's doing;
Lordy, missus, you don't know what we's striving at; we's just
blasting out de stone for de foundation ob de Temple." So, my friends,
when you hear us laying so much emphasis upon the moral and economic
training, upon home-getting and all those things, remember we are
simply trying to teach our people to blast out the foundation of the
temple in which we are to grow and be useful.

Says the Psalmist: "O Lord, how manifold are Thy works; in wisdom hast
Thou made them all; the earth is full of Thy riches." I believe that a
wise Providence means that we shall use all the material riches of the
earth: soil, wood, minerals, stones, water, air, and what not, as a
means through which to reach God and glorify Him.

I have thus briefly dealt with the problem of slavery in its relations
to the economic and moral growth of my people. Each one of these
periods has presented a problem of tremendous importance and
seriousness to your race and to my race.

If more attention had been given to the economic and industrial
development of Liberia in the early stages of the history of that
republic, Liberia would be far in advance of its present condition
both in morals and religion, to say nothing of commercial prosperity.
In Liberia there is an immense territory rich with resources.
Notwithstanding this, there are no improved or advanced methods of
agriculture; the soil is scarcely stirred; there are no carts, wagons
or other wheeled vehicles, practically no public roads, no bridges, no
railroads; the mineral wealth and the timber wealth remain almost
untouched; and I am told on good authority that, in spite of all this
wealth right at the very door of these people, even school-teachers
and ministers wear clothing manufactured in the United States or in
Europe, and eat canned goods that come from Chicago or Germany.

It requires no argument to impress the fact that the most practical
missionary work would have been in the direction of teaching these
people how to cultivate the soil in the best manner with the very best
implements, how to get the wealth out of their forests and water and
mines, how to build roads, decent bridges and decent houses; in a
word, how to take hold of the material riches with which Providence
has blessed the land and turn these riches into moral and religious
growth. This, in my opinion, would have represented the very highest
kind of missionary work.

I do not grow discouraged or despondent by reason of great and serious
problems. On the contrary, I deem it a privilege to be permitted to
live in an age when great, serious, and perplexing problems are to be
met and solved. I would not care to live in a period when there was no
weak part of the human family to be helped up and no wrongs to be
righted. It is only through struggle and the surmounting of
difficulties that races, like individuals, are made strong, powerful,
and useful.

This is the road the Negro should travel; this is the road, in my
opinion, the Negro will travel. I sometimes fear that in our great
anxiety to push forward we lay too much stress upon our former
condition. We should think less of our former growth and more of the
present and of the things which go to retard or hinder that growth. In
one of his letters to the Galatians, St. Paul says: "But the fruit of
the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness,
faith, meekness, temperance; against such there is no law."

I believe that it is possible for a race, as it is for an individual,
to learn to live up in such a high atmosphere that there is no human
law that can prevail against it. There is no man who can pass a law to
affect the Negro in relation to his singing, his peace, and his
self-control. Wherever I go I would enter St. Paul's atmosphere and,
living through and in that spirit, we will grow and make progress and,
notwithstanding discouragements and mistakes, we will become an
increasingly strong part of the Christian citizenship of this
republic.




       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPTER II

THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OF THE NEGRO RACE SINCE ITS EMANCIPATION

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER II

THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OF THE NEGRO RACE SINCE ITS EMANCIPATION


In the preceding chapter, I referred to some of the things which the
Negro brought with him out of slavery into his life of freedom that he
used to his advantage. I shall now discuss those things that were to
his disadvantage.

We must bear in mind that one of the influences of slavery was to
impress upon both master and slave the fact that labor with the hand
was not dignified, was disgraceful, that labor of this character was
something to be escaped, to be gotten rid of just as soon as possible.
Hence, it was very natural that the Negro race looked forward to the
day of freedom as being that period when it would be delivered from
all necessity of laboring with the hand. It was natural that a large
proportion of the race, immediately after its freedom, should make the
mistake of confusing freedom with license. Under the circumstances,
any other race would have acted in the same manner.

One of the first and most important lessons, then, to be taught the
Negro when he became free was the one that labor with the hand or with
the head, so far from being something to be dreaded and shunned, was
something that was dignified and something that should be sought,
loved, and appreciated. Here began the function of the industrial
school for the education of the Negro. This was the uppermost idea of
General Armstrong, the father of industrial education of the Negro.
And permit me to say right here, that, in my opinion, General
Armstrong, more than any other single individual, is the father of
industrial education not only for the Negro, but in a large measure
for the entire United States. For you must always bear in mind that,
prior to the establishment of such institutions as the Hampton
Institute, there was practically no systematic industrial training
given for either black or white people, either North or South. At the
present time more attention is being paid to this kind of education
for white boys and girls than is being given to black boys and girls.

It is an interesting thought that this kind of education, started
thirty-five years ago for the education of the Negro, has spread
throughout the United States, in the North and West, and has taken
hold upon the people who once enslaved the Negro in our Southern
states.

When industrial schools were first established in the South for the
education of members of my race, stubborn objection was raised against
them on the part of black people. This was the experience of Hampton,
and this in later years was the experience of the Tuskeegee
Institute.

I remember that for a number of years after the founding of the
Tuskeegee Institute, objection on the part of parents and on the part
of students poured in upon me from day to day. The parents said that
they wanted their children taught "the book," but they did not want
them taught anything concerning farming or household duties. It was
curious to note how most of the people worshiped "the book." The
parent did not care what was inside the book; the harder and the
longer the name of it, the better it satisfied the parent every time,
and the more books you could require the child to purchase, the better
teacher you were. His reputation as a first-class pedagogue was added
to very largely in that section if the teacher required the child to
buy a long string of books each year and each month. I found some
white people who had the same idea.

They reminded me further that the Negro for two hundred and fifty
years as a slave had been worked, and now that the race was free they
contended that their children ought not to be taught to work and
especially while in school. In answer to these objections I said to
them that it was true that the race had been worked in slavery, but
the great lesson which we wanted to learn in freedom was to work. I
explained to them that there was a vast difference between being
worked and working. I said to them that being worked meant
degradation, that working meant civilization.

We have gone on at Tuskeegee from that day until this, emphasizing the
difference between being worked and working, until, I am glad to say,
every sign of opposition against any form of industrial education has
completely disappeared from among parents and students; and I but
state the truth when I say that industrial education, whether on the
farm or in the carpenter shop or in the cooking class, is even more
sought after at Tuskeegee than is training in purely academic
branches. It has been ten years since I have had a single application
for other than a form of industrial training. On the contrary, this
kind of training is so popular among them that we have many
applications from other students who live in other states who wish to
devote themselves wholly to the industrial side of education.

From Hampton and Tuskeegee and other large educational centres the
idea of industrial education has spread throughout the South, and
there are now scores of institutions that are giving this kind of
training in a most effective and helpful manner; so that, in my
opinion, the greatest thing that we have accomplished for the Negro
race within the last twenty-five years has been to rid his mind of all
idea of labor's being degrading. This has been no inconsiderable
achievement. If I were asked to point out the greatest change
accomplished for the Negro race, I would say that it was not a
tangible, physical change, but a change of the spirit,--the new idea
of our people with respect to Negro labor.

Industrial education has had another value wherever it has been put
into practice, that is in starting the Negro off in his new life in a
natural, logical, sensible manner instead of allowing him to be led
into temptation to begin life in an artificial atmosphere without any
real foundation.

All races that have reached success and have influenced the world for
righteousness have laid their foundation at one stage of their career
in the intelligent and successful cultivation of the soil; that is,
have begun their free life by coming into contact with earth and wood
and stone and minerals. Any people that begins on a natural foundation
of this kind, rises slowly but naturally and gradually in the world.

In my work at Tuskeegee and in what I have endeavored to accomplish in
writing and in speaking before the public, I have always found it
important to stick to nature as closely as possible, and the same
policy should be followed with a race. If you will excuse my making a
personal reference, just as often as I can when I am at home, I like
to get my hoe and dig in my garden, to come into contact with real
earth, or to touch my pigs and fowls. Whenever I want new material for
an address or a magazine article, I follow the plan of getting away
from the town with its artificial surroundings and getting back into
the country, where I can sleep in a log cabin and eat the food of the
farmer, go among the people at work on the plantations and hear them
tell their experiences. I have gotten more material in this way than I
have by reading books.

Many of these seemingly ignorant people, while not educated in the way
that we consider education, have in reality a very high form of
education--that which they have gotten out of contact with nature.
Only a few days ago I heard one of these old farmers, who could
neither read nor write, give a lesson before a Farmers' Institute that
I shall never forget. The old man got up on the platform and began
with this remark: "I'se had no chance to study science, but I'se been
making some science for myself," and then he held up before the
audience a stalk of cotton with only two bolls on it. He said he began
his scientific work with that stalk. Then he held up a second stalk
and showed how the following year he had improved the soil so that the
stalk contained four bolls, and then he held up a third stalk and
showed how he had improved the soil and method of cultivation until
the stalk contained six bolls, and so he went through the whole
process until he had demonstrated to his fellow farmers how he had
made a single stalk of cotton produce twelve or fourteen bolls. At the
close of the old man's address somebody in the audience asked what his
name was. He replied, "When I didn't own no home and was in debt,
they used to call me old Jim Hill, but now that I own a home and am
out of debt, they call me 'Mr. James Hill.'"

In the previous chapter I referred to the practical benefit that could
be achieved in foreign mission fields through economic and industrial
development. Now that industrial education is understood and
appreciated by the Negro in America, the question which has the most
practical value to you and to me is what effect has this kind of
development had upon the moral and religious life of the Negro right
here in America since the race became free.

By reason of the difficulty in getting reliable and comprehensive
statistics, it is not easy to answer this question with satisfaction,
but I believe that enough facts can be given to show that economic and
industrial development has wonderfully improved the moral and
religious life of the Negro race in America, and that, just in
proportion as any race progresses in this same direction, its moral
and religious life will be strengthened and made more practical.

Let me first emphasize the fact that in order for the moral and
religious life to be strengthened we must of necessity have industry,
but along with industry there must be intelligence and refinement.
Without these two elements combined, the moral and religious lives of
the people are not very much helped.

A few months ago I was in a mining camp composed largely of members of
my race who were, for the most part, ignorant and uncultivated, who
had had little opportunities in the way of education, but they had
been taught to mine coal. The operators of this mine complained that,
notwithstanding the unusually high wages being paid during that
season, these miners could not be induced to work more than three or
four days out of six. The difficulty was right here; these miners
were so ignorant that they had few wants, and these were simple and
crude. Their wants could be satisfied by working a few days out of
each week, and when they had satisfied their wants they could not
understand why it was necessary to work any longer, and we must all
acknowledge that there is a good deal of human nature in this point of
view.

In a case of this kind, what is needed is not only to have the
individual educated in industry but to have his hand so trained that
he will become ambitious; as one man put it not long ago, "He will
want more wants." We should get the man to the point where he will
want a house, where his wife will want carpet for the floor, pictures
for the walls, books, a newspaper and a substantial kind of furniture.
We should get the family to the point where it will want money to
educate its children, to support the minister and the church. Later,
we should get this family to the point where it will want to put
money in the bank and perhaps have the experience of placing a
mortgage on some property. When this stage of development has been
reached, there is no difficulty in getting individuals to work six
days during the week.

I have in mind now an old colored man who lived some four miles from
the Institution. I first noticed him a number of years ago as I took
my daily exercise after my day's work. I found him and his wife living
in a little broken-down cabin and resolved to try an experiment on
them to see if I could not get them to realize that that kind of life
proved of no benefit. When I began, their wants were for the bare
necessities of life only. I gradually began to talk to his wife and
urge her to see the importance of living a different kind of life.
Without the old man's knowing it, I took pains to tell her of how some
of their neighbors were living and about some of the things her
neighbors were owning. Some had two-room houses, glass windows, new
furniture, and little pieces of carpet, and had whitewashed their
houses. Finally she became quite interested.

When I began with the man he was working about three days in the week.
The old fellow grew interested and began to work a little longer,
until the last time I rode by that house the old man was working
nearly every day in the week, while they were living in a two-room
house and everything had changed. The hardest task I had was to get
him to put up a chimney for the second room, finally he put up one and
although it was a pretty rickety, crooked affair, yet it answered the
purpose and he felt proud of it. When I left this time he informed me
that by the time I came back he would try to have both of those rooms
whitewashed. I am not through with that family yet. I am going to work
on that woman until through her I will get the old man to work five
and six days out of the week.

It should always be borne in mind that, for any person of any race,
literary education alone increases his want; and, if you increase
these wants without at the same time training the individual in a
manner to enable him to supply these increased wants, you have not
always strengthened his moral and religious basis.

The same principle might be illustrated in connection with South
Africa. In that country there are six millions of Negroes.
Notwithstanding this fact, South Africa suffers to-day perhaps as
never before for lack of labor. The natives have never been educated
by contact with the white man in the same way as has been true of the
American Negro. They have never been educated in the day school nor in
the Sunday-school nor in the church, nor in the industrial school or
college; hence their ambitions have never been awakened, their wants
have not been increased, and they work perhaps two days out of the
week and are in idleness during the remaining portion of the time.
This view of the case I had confirmed in a conversation with a
gentleman who had large interests in South Africa.

How different in the Southern part of the United States where we have
eight millions of black people! Ask any man who has had practical
experience in using the masses of these people as laborers and he will
tell you that in proportion to their progress in the civilization of
the world, it is difficult to find any set of men who will labor in a
more satisfactory way. True, these people have not by any means
reached perfection in this regard, but they have advanced on the whole
much beyond the condition of the South Africans. The trained American
Negro has learned to want the highest and best in our civilization,
and as we go on giving him more education, increasing his industrial
efficiency and his love of labor, he will soon get to the point where
he will work six days out of each week.

But as to the results of industrial training. Following the example of
the modern pedagogue, let me begin with that which I know most about,
the Tuskeegee Institute. This institution employs one of its officers
who spends a large part of his time in keeping in close contact with
our graduates and former students. He visits them in their homes and
in their places of employment and not only sees for himself what they
are doing, but gets the testimony of their neighbors and employers,
and I can state positively that not ten per cent. of the men and women
who have graduated from the Tuskeegee Institute or who have been there
long enough to understand the spirit and methods of that institution
can be found to-day in idleness in any part of the country. They are
at work because they have learned the dignity and beauty and
civilizing influence and, I might add, Christianizing power of labor;
they have learned the degradation and demoralizing influence of
idleness; they have learned to love labor for its own sake and are
miserable unless they are at work. I consider labor one of the
greatest boons which our Creator has conferred upon human beings.

Further, after making careful investigation, I am prepared to say that
there is not a single man or woman who holds a diploma from the
Tuskeegee Institute who can be found within the walls of any
penitentiary in the United States.

I have learned that not more than a score of the graduates of the
fifteen oldest and largest colleges and industrial schools in the
entire South have been sent to prison since these institutions were
established. Those who are guilty of crime for the most part are
individuals who are without education, without a trade, who own no
land, who are not taxpayers, who have no bank account, and who have
made no progress in industrial and economic development.

The following extracts from a letter written by a Southern white man
to the _Daily Advertiser_, of Montgomery, Alabama, contains most
valuable testimony. The letter refers to convicts in Alabama, most of
whom are colored:

    "I was conversing not long ago with the warden of one of our
    mining prisons, containing about 500 convicts. The warden is a
    practical man, who has been in charge of prisoners for more than
    fifteen years, and has no theories of any kind to support. I
    remarked to him that I wanted some information as to the effect
    of manual training in preventing criminality, and asked him to
    state what per cent. of the prisoners under his charge had
    received any manual training, besides acquaintance with the
    crudest agricultural labor. He replied: 'Perhaps about one per
    cent.' He added: 'No, much less than that. We have here at
    present only one mechanic; that is, there is one man who claims
    to be a house painter.'

    "'Have you any shoemakers?'

    "'Never had a shoemaker.'

    "'Have you any tailors?'

    "'Never had a tailor.'

    "'Any printers?'

    "'Never had a printer.'

    "'Any carpenters?'

    "'Never had a carpenter. There is not a man in this prison that
    could saw to a straight line.'"

Now these facts seem to show that manual training is almost as good a
preventative of criminality as vaccination is of smallpox.

The records of the South show that ninety per cent. of the colored
people in prisons are without knowledge of trades, and sixty-one per
cent. are illiterate.

There are few higher authorities on the progress of the Negro than
Joel Chandler Harris, of the _Atlanta Constitution_, of "Uncle Remus"
fame. Mr. Harris had opportunity to know the Negro before the war, and
he has followed his progress closely in freedom. In a printed
statement made some time ago Mr. Harris says:

    "The point I desire to make is that the overwhelming majority of
    the Negroes in all parts of the South, especially in the
    agricultural regions, are leading sober and industrious lives. A
    temperate race is bound to be industrious, and the Negroes are
    temperate when compared with the whites. Even in the towns the
    majority of them are sober and industrious."

Dr. Frissell makes the same statement regarding Hampton Institute. Not
more than a score of the graduates have been sent to prison since
these institutions were established. The majority is among those who
are without training and who have made no progress in industrial and
economic development. The idle and criminal classes among them make a
great show in the police court records, but right here in Atlanta the
respectable and decent Negroes far outnumber those who are on the
lists of the police as old or new offenders. I am bound to conclude
from what I see all about me, and what I know of the race elsewhere,
that the Negro, notwithstanding the late start he has made in
civilization and enlightenment, is capable of making himself a useful
member in the communities in which he lives and moves, and that he is
become more and more desirous of conforming to all the laws that have
been enacted for the protection of society.

Some time ago I sent out letters to representative Southern men,
covering each ex-slave state, asking them to state, judging by their
observation in their own communities, what effect industrial education
has upon the morals and religion of the Negro. To these questions I
received 136 replies as follows:

Has education improved the morals of the black race?

Answers--Yes, 97; No, 20; Unanswered, 19.

Has it made his religion less emotional and more practical?

Answers--Yes, 101; No, 16; Unanswered, 19.

Is it, as a rule, the ignorant or the educated who commit crime?

Answers--Ignorant, 115; Educated, 3; Unanswered, 18.

Does crime grow less as education increases among the colored people?

Answers--Yes, 102; No, 19; Unanswered, 15.

Do not these figures speak for themselves?

If possible I want to give you an idea of the progress of the Negro
race in a single county in one of the Southern States. For this
purpose I select Gloucester County, Virginia. I take this one for the
reason that I had the privilege of visiting it a number of years ago,
just about the time when interest in the education of the colored
people was beginning to be aroused, and for the further reason that
this is one of the counties in Virginia and the South that has been
longest under the influence of graduates of the Hampton Institute, or
of men and women trained in other centres of education.

Gloucester County is the tide-water section of Eastern Virginia.
According to the census of 1890, Gloucester County contained a total
population of 12,832, a little over one-half being colored, and both
sets of schools are in session from five and a half to six months, and
the pay of the two sets of teachers is about the same. The majority of
the colored teachers in this county were trained at Hampton, and have
been teaching in this county a number of years. For the most part, the
teachers of Gloucester County are not mentally superior, but what they
lack in methods of teaching and mental alertness is more than made up
for by the moral earnestness and the example they set. Most of the
teachers are natives of the county, and, what is more important, most
of them own property in the county.

Now, what is the economic or material result in one county where the
Negro has been given a reasonable chance to make progress? I say
"reasonable" because it must be kept in mind that the great body of
white people in America, with whom the Negro is constantly compared,
have schools that are in session from eight to nine months in the
year. Note especially what I am going to say now. According to the
public records, the total assessed value of the land in Gloucester
County is $666,132.33. Of the total value of the land, the colored
people own $87,953.55. The buildings in the county have an assessed
valuation of $466,127.05. The colored people pay taxes upon $79,387.00
of this amount. To state it differently, the Negroes of Gloucester
County, beginning about forty years ago in poverty, have reached the
point where they now own and pay taxes upon one-sixth of the real
estate in this county. This property is very largely in the shape of
small farms, varying in size from ten to one hundred acres. A large
proportion of the farms contain about ten acres.

It is interesting to note the influence of this material growth upon
the home life of the people. It is stated upon good authority that
about twenty-five years ago at least three-fourths of the colored
people lived in one-roomed cabins. Let a single illustration tell the
story of the growth. In a school where there were thirty pupils ten
testified that they lived in houses containing six rooms, and only one
said that he lived in a house containing but a single room.

I repeat, I have always believed that in proportion as the industrial,
not omitting the intellectual, condition of my race is improved, in
the same degree would their moral and religious life improve.

Some years ago, before the home life and economic condition of the
people had improved, bastardy was common in Gloucester County. In 1903
there were only eight cases of bastardy reported in the whole county,
and two of those were among the white population. During the year 1904
there was only one case of bastardy within a radius of ten miles of
the court house. Another gratifying evidence of progress is shown by
the fact that there is very little evidence of immoral relations
existing between the races. In the whole county, during the year 1903,
about twenty-five years after the work of education had gotten under
way, there were only thirty arrests for misdemeanors; of these sixteen
were white, fourteen colored. In 1904 there were fifteen such
arrests--fourteen white and one colored. In 1904 there were but seven
arrests for felonies; of these two were white and five were colored.

In one point at least the colored people in Gloucester County have set
an example for the rest of the religious world that ought to receive
attention. It is in this regard: there is only one religious
denomination in all of this county, and that is the Baptist. No
over-multiplying, no over-lapping, no denominational wrangling and
wasting of money and energy.

May I add that, out of my own observation and experience in the heart
of the South during the last twenty-five years, I have learned that
the man of my race who has some regular occupation, who owns his farm,
is a taxpayer and perhaps has a little money in the bank, is the most
reliable and helpful man in the Sunday-school, in the church, and in
all religious endeavor. The man who has gotten upon his feet in these
directions is almost never charged with crime, but is the one who has
the respect and the confidence of both races in his community.

I can give you no better idea of the tremendous advance which the
Negro has made since he became free than to say that largely through
the influence of industrial education the race has acquired ownership
in land that is equal in area to the combined countries of Belgium and
Holland. This, for a race starting in poverty and ignorance forty
years ago, it seems to me is a pretty good record.

I would not have you understand that I emphasize material possessions
as the chief thing in life or as an object within itself. I emphasize
economic growth because the civilization of the world teaches that the
possession of a certain amount of material wealth indicates the
ability of a race to exercise self-control, to plan to-day for
to-morrow, to do without to-day in order that it may possess
to-morrow. In other words, a race, like an individual, becomes highly
civilized and useful in proportion as it learns to use the good things
of this earth, not as an end, but as a means toward promoting its own
moral and religious growth and the prosperity and happiness of the
world. This is what I advocate for my race; it is what I would
advocate for any race.

The average white man of America, in passing judgment upon the black
race, very often overlooks the fact that geographically and physically
the semi-barbarous Negro race has been thrown right down in the centre
of the highest civilization that the world knows anything about.
Consciously or unconsciously, you compare the Negro's progress with
your progress, forgetting, when you are doing it, that you are placing
a pretty severe test on the members of my race. If, for example, we
were compared with the civilization of the Oriental countries, the
test would not be so severe. But we have been placed in the midst of a
pushing, surging, restless, conquering, successful civilization, and
you must acknowledge that when the American white man wants to lead,
no other race can go far ahead. In fact, he would have the whole
field to himself. The progress of the Negro will be in proportion as
they learn to get the material things of this world, consecrate them,
and weave them into the service of our Heavenly Father.

In conclusion, may I say that I hope the people of this country, North
and South, will learn to pray more and more; and, as they pray, to put
their hands upon their hearts and then ask God if they were placed in
the Negro's state, how, under the circumstances, would they like to be
treated by their fellows. Conscience will answer the question.




       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPTER III

THE ECONOMIC REVOLUTION IN THE SOUTH

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER III

THE ECONOMIC REVOLUTION IN THE SOUTH


Two questions may be asked of any group of human beings: first, How do
they earn their living, and secondly, What is their attitude toward
life? The first relates to the economic history and condition of that
people; the second is a study of their religion. In these two essays I
am to treat the first of these questions under the subject: The
Economic Revolution in the South, and the second under the subject:
Christianity in the South.

The last century was notable because of the great change in method and
organization of human work and we call the early part of the
nineteenth century the time of economic revolution in Europe and to
some extent in America. The southern United States, however, while
profoundly influenced by this revolution from the first, has not
until to-day actually felt its full effect. The new factory system of
the early nineteenth century is just to-day appearing in the South,
and yet its appearance in England and New England seventy-five years
ago made the South a part of the world industrial organization by
making it the seat of cotton culture (see Note [1]).

Two diverse developments resulted: In England and the North came a
change from household industry to social industry, a step forward
which led to an era of machinery, to a curious concentration of
individuals and wealth and the necessities of living in certain great
centres. That very concentration led to a wonderful contact of man
with man which sharpened mind and sharpened thought and in the long
run made the Europe of to-day. On the other hand, the southern United
States, though really a part of this great system through its work of
furnishing raw cotton, did not come into the whirl of the new
industry because she had an industrial system which forbade machinery,
discouraged human contact, and shackled thought.

Why did this system of slavery persist so long in the South as to be
caught in the vortex of the new industrial movement and rendered
almost inextricable?

If the South had been a place of intelligent farmers on small farms,
we could imagine a development which would have been the wonder of the
world; but because the fathers of the United States were so busy with
large questions that they forgot larger ones, so busy settling matters
of commerce and representation and politics that they forgot matters
of work and justice and human rights--because of this we have in the
South one of those curious back eddies of human progress that twist
and puzzle advance and thought.

The very forward forces of industry that fastened slavery on the South
were weaving a social system which made the enslavement of laborers
impossible and unprofitable. Consequently at the very time when the
South ought to have been increasing in intelligence, law and order,
the use of machinery, industrial concentration, and the intensive
culture of land with the rest of the world, she lost a half century in
a development backward toward a dispersing of population, extensive
rather than intensive land culture, increased and compulsory ignorance
of the laboring class, and the rearing of a complete system of caste
and aristocracy (see Note 2).

Evils there were to be sure in the new factory system of Europe and
the North, evils which southern leaders did not fail to note and gloat
over, but they were evils of another and newer industrial era, which
did not stop progress, but gave it added incentive.

The industrial back-set of the South meant of course but one thing:
the discovery of the paradox of slavery, the turning from the
mistake, and the adoption of remedial measures which should usher into
the South the same industrial revolution in methods of work which
Europe saw begin a century ago. This is exactly what has happened, and
to-day the Industrial Revolution is beginning south of Mason and
Dixon's line. The forecast of change was apparent by 1850. Slavery
still paid then--was still an economic success, but only under
conditions which became more and more impossible of realization
because of the factory system and the new industrial conditions in the
rest of the world (see Note 3).

It was, in other words, an attempt at an industrial system with the
lowest wages, the most oppressive labor laws, and the best natural
advantages. Such a system at such a time carried its own sentence of
death: fertile land was becoming scarce in the forties, the horrors of
the slave trade had shocked even the eighteenth century, and southern
labor laws which made knowledge a crime and migration of laborers a
capital offense, simply could not be enforced. It was in vain that the
solidly united capitalistic classes of the South threw themselves
bodily into the fray--raped Mexico, filibustered in Cuba and Central
America, encouraged slave-smuggling (see Note 4), and bullied the
hesitating North; their economic doom was written even if militant
Abolitionism had not appeared.

The economic student could have foretold and did foretell easily in
the forties and fifties that slavery in the South was doomed (see Note
5): even if all available territory had been thrown wide to the slave
system, slavery could not possibly have stayed in Kansas and Utah, in
New Mexico or in Arizona; it could have stayed only temporarily in
Missouri and in Texas. It had already reached its territorial limit,
it was bound to have evolved something different. It will always be an
interesting speculation as to how soon this economic necessity would
have been recognized; whether the South would have had the acumen
eventually to see the end, and what sort of gradual change could have
come about, had it not been for the political crisis precipitated in
1861.

Then came the war--that disgraceful episode of civil strife when,
leaving the arguments of men, the nation appealed to the last resort
of dogs, murdering and ravishing each other for four long shameful
years (see Note 6).

When this nightmare had passed there came, after the resulting period
of disorder, a new rÃ©gime, a new problem of labor, a new industrial
order. Not only that, but gradually in the decade 1870-1880 there were
added to the South four new economic activities: first, the iron
industry; second, the manufacture of cotton cloth; third, the
transportation of these goods to, from, and through the South; and
fourth, the general exchange of goods in this growing Southern
industrial population--in other words, the Industrial Revolution was
beginning in the South. So that the South of the 80's was a different
South from the South of the 60's, not simply by reason of emancipation
but by reason of new economic possibilities.

However, this change could not go on unhindered by the mistakes of the
past. With all that was new in the South, there was also much that was
old, and of these old things the most important were the Ideals which
slavery handed down--ideals of government, of labor, of caste.

Consequently when the South tried to use its new freed labor on its
new industrial possibilities, it went to the problem full of the
ideals of slavery, and it made four separate attempts. In the first
place it was perfectly natural for a land which had said for
generations that free Negro labor was an impossibility, and free Negro
citizens unthinkable, to cherish a very distinct idea that the way to
get along with the emancipated Negro was to make him a slave in fact
if not in name. The idea that was back of the first apprentice laws
and the various labor codes passed directly after Lee's surrender was
that the labor of the blacks belonged to the former white owners by
right and could be directed only by force under a nominal wage system.
These labor codes therefore attempted to reÃ«stablish slavery without a
slave trade (see Note 7).

These ill-advised attempts were frustrated by the Fifteenth Amendment
which made the freedmen voters. The Thirteenth Amendment did not
abolish slavery--it directed its abolition and the answer to it was
the labor codes. The Fourteenth Amendment gave the freedmen civil
rights and put a premium on granting them political rights, but the
premium was not accepted and the civil rights remained unenforced. The
Fifteenth Amendment went to the root of the matter by putting local
political power into the hands of the freedmen and their friends and
this made slavery and the slave system impossible.

What the nation had before it then was not the nice academic question
as to whether it would be better to have as voters men of intelligence
or men of ignorance, whether it would be better to throw into the
electorate of a great modern country a mass of slaves or a mass of
college graduates--no such question came before the country; it was,
as we are fond of saying, a situation and not a theory that confronted
the country and that situation was this: here in the South we had
attempted to abolish slavery by act of legislature--it was not
abolished. The people who hitherto held power did not believe in its
real abolishment; a great and growing economic revolution fronted
them, cotton was still king. They were about to solve that problem--to
meet the Revolution--according to their former labor ideals.

One could not expect any other outcome. One could not in justice ask
them voluntarily to accept free black labor; the only possible way to
insure the solving of that economic problem with labor really free was
to put in the South a political power which should make slavery in
fact or inference forever impossible. This truth the great Thaddeus
Stephens saw, and with a statesmanship far greater than Lincoln's he
forced Negro suffrage on the South.

Although the new voters thus introduced in the South were crude and
ignorant, and in many ways ill-fitted to rule, nevertheless in the
fundamental postulates of American freedom and democracy they were
sane and sound. Some of them were silly, some were ignorant, and some
were venal, but they were not as silly as those who had fostered
slavery in the South, nor as ignorant as those who were determined to
perpetuate it, and the black voters of South Carolina never stole half
as much as the white voters of Pennsylvania are stealing to-day.

The eternal monument to these maligned victims of a nation's wrong is
the fact that they began the abolition of slavery in fact and not
merely attack it in theory, they established free schools, and they
passed laws on all subjects under which the white South is still
content to live (see Note 8). If these men had been protected in their
legal rights by the strong arm of the government, they would have been
able to protect themselves in a generation or so. They would have
increased in intelligence, responsibility, and power, and this the
South was determined to prevent. The North wavered; having put its
hand to the plow it looked back, and gradually allowed the black
peasantry of the South to be almost completely disfranchised. What
happened?

The time had passed for a reÃ«stablishment of slavery, but serfdom and
peonage were still possible and probable. When you have the leading
classes of a country with the ideal of slavery in their minds and the
laboring classes ignorant and without political power, there is but
one system that can ensue and that is serfdom, and through serfdom was
the second way in which the South strove to meet its great post-bellum
economic problem.

Given these premises the economic answer of the South was, from a
business standpoint, perfectly sound. The men who, starting poor after
a miserable war, went into the development of the South, went in to
make money--to use the great American thesis, they were "not in
business for their health." They were going to grant to the laborer
just as little as they must; the laborer was unused to a system of
free labor, he was not a steady workman, he was not a skilled workman,
he had been for two or three hundred years driven to his work, he took
no pride in his work--how could he take pride in that which hitherto
had been the badge of his shame?

Now it was not considered the business of the new Southern business
man to develop and train the working man. It was his business, as I
have said, from the American point of view, to make money. And the
consequence was that he evolved a peculiarly ingenious system of land
serfdom, which bears many likenesses to the serfdom that replaced
slavery in Europe. The land belonged to the landlord--it was rented
out to the serf; the serf was nominally free, but as a matter of fact
he was not free at all; he was held to his labor: he rose with the
morning work bell of slavery days, he was driven to his labor by
mounted riders, he was whipped for delinquencies, he received no
stipulated return, but on the contrary the owner of the land made the
contract, kept the accounts, and gave him enough once or twice a year
to make him not too dissatisfied.

After a time this changed somewhat; instead of the land owner himself
undertaking the advancing of supplies, a third party, the merchant
with capital, came in. In order to enforce such a system it needed to
be backed by a peculiar law system--therefore the business men went
into politics in the South with the same result as when business men
go into politics in the North. Things were done quickly and quietly;
they were done not for the good of people who had no political voice,
but for the good of those who wielded the political power, _i.e._, the
business men and land owners. The laws were made to favor the landlord
and the merchant and to make it easy to exploit the tenant and
laborer.

This system, which still is the rule of agricultural labor in the
black belt of the South, is not a system of free labor; it is simply
a form of peonage. The black peon is held down by perpetual debt or
petty criminal judgments; his rent rises with the price of cotton, his
chances to buy land are either non-existent or confined to infertile
regions. Judge and jury are in honor bound to hold him down; if by
accident or miracle he escapes and becomes a landholder, his property,
civil and political status are still at the mercy of the worst of the
white voters, and his very life at the whim of the mob. The power of
the individual white patron to protect colored men is still great and
is often exercised, but this is but another argument against the
system: it is undemocratic and un-American, and stamps on the serf
system its most damning criticism.

Moreover, this second attempt to meet the economic revolution of the
South is failing, and its failure is shown by the scarcity of farm
labor, the migration of Negroes, and the increase of crime and
lawlessness. Serfdom like slavery demands ignorance and strict laws.
The decade of Negro voting and Northern benevolence had however given
the Negro schools and aspiration.

What now has been the reaction of this group on the environment thrown
around it since slavery days?

The slaves had their select classes in the house servants and the
artisans. After freedom came, the Negro made four distinct efforts to
reach economic safety. The first effort was by means of the select
house-servant class; the second, by means of competitive industry; the
third, by land-owning; and the fourth, by what I shall call the group
economy.

First, let us look at the effort of the house servants. The one person
under the slave rÃ©gime who came nearest to escaping from the toils of
slavery and the disabilities of caste was the favorite house servant.
This was because the house servant was brought into contact with the
culture of the master and the family, because he had often the
advantages of town and city life, was able to gain some smattering of
education, and also because he was usually a blood relative of the
master class. These house servants, therefore, became the natural
leaders of the emancipated race and the brunt of the burden of
reconstruction fell upon their shoulders. When the history of this
period is carefully written it will show that few men ever made a more
meritorious fight against overwhelming odds.

Under free competition it would have been natural for this class of
house servants to enter the economic life of the nation directly. In
some cases this happened, especially in the case of the barber and the
caterer. For the most part, however, the black applicant was refused
admittance to the economic society of the nation. He held his own in
the semi-servile work of barber until he met the charge of color
discrimination in his own race, and the competition of foreigners. The
caterer was displaced by palatial hotels in which he could have no
part.

On the whole, then, the mass of house servants soon found the doors in
their own lines closed in their faces. They could remain good servants
but they could not by this means often escape into higher walks of
life. The better tenth of them went gradually into professions and
thus found economic independence for themselves and their children.
The mass of them either remained house servants or turned toward
industry.

The second attempt of the freedmen toward economic safety lay in
industry. It was a less ambitious effort than that of the house
servants, and included larger numbers of men. It was characterized by
a large migration to the towns. Here it was that the class of slave
artisans made themselves felt in freedom and they were joined by
numbers of unskilled workmen, such as steam railway hands, porters,
hostlers, etc. This class attracted considerable attention and bore
the brunt of the economic battle in competition with white working
men. It is a class that is growing and in the future it is going to
have a large development. At present, however, its fight is difficult.

The third effort of economic elevation was by land owning. This was
the ideal toward which the great mass of black people looked. They at
first thought that the government was going to help them, and the
government did in a few instances, as when Sherman distributed land in
Georgia and the government sold South Carolina lands for taxes. For
the most part, however, the Negroes had to buy their own lands which
they did in some cases by means of their bounty money for serving in
the army or by means of special monies which they earned as workmen
during the war or by the help of the former masters. Some too, by the
share tenant system gained enough to buy land. In this way about
200,000 to-day own their farms and thus approximate economic
independence.

The fourth and last effort, which I call the Group Economy, is of
great importance, but is not very well understood. It consists of a
coÃ¶perative arrangement of industry and service in a group which tends
to make the group a closed economic circle, largely independent of
surrounding whites. This development explains many anomalies in the
situation of the Negro. Many people think that the colored barber is
disappearing, yet there are more colored barbers in the United States
to-day than ever before, but a larger number than ever cater to only
colored trade. The Negro lawyer serves almost exclusively colored
clientage, so that his existence is half forgotten by the white world.
The new Negro business men are not successors of the old. There used
to be Negro business men in Northern cities and a few even in Southern
cities, but they catered to white trade; the Negro business man to-day
caters to colored trade. So far has this gone to-day that in every
city in the United States which has considerable Negro population, the
colored group is serving itself in religion, medical care, legal
advice and often educating its children. In growing degree also it is
serving itself in insurance, houses, books, amusements.

So extraordinary has been this development that it forms a large and
growing part in the economy of perhaps half the Negroes of the United
States, and in the case of perhaps 100,000 town Negroes, representing
at least 300,000 persons, the group economy approaches a complete
system. To these we may add the bulk of 200,000 farmers who own their
farms. Thus we have a group of half a million who are reaching
economic safety by means of group economy (see Note 9).

Here then are the two developments--a determined effort at an
established serfdom on the part of landholding capitalists, and a
determined effort on the part of freedmen and their sons to attain
economic independence.

While both these movements were progressing the full change of the
industrial revolution, so long postponed, began to be felt all over
the South; the iron and steel industry developed in Alabama and
Tennessee, coal mining in Tennessee and West Virginia, and cotton
manufacture in Carolina and Georgia; railways were consolidated into
systems and extended, commerce was organized and concentrated. The
greatest single visible result of this was the growth of cities. Towns
of eight thousand and more had a tenth of the white Southerners in
1860; they held a seventh of a much larger population in 1900, while
a fifth were in cities and villages. Still more striking was the
movement of Negroes; only four per cent. were in cities before the
war, to-day a seventh are there.

The reason for this is clear: the oppression and serfdom of the
country, the opportunities of the city. It was in the town and city
alone that the emerging classes, outside the landholders, were
successful, and even the landholders were helped by the earnings of
the city; the house servants with the upper class of barbers and
caterers, the artisans, the day laborers, the professional men,
including the best of the teachers, were in the cities, and the new
group economy was developed here.

On the other hand one of the inevitable expedients for fastening
serfdom on the country Negro was enforced ignorance.

The Negro school system established by the Negro reconstruction
governments reached its culmination in the decade 1870-1880. Since
then determined effort has been made in the country districts to make
the Negro schools less efficient. To-day these schools are worse than
they were twenty years ago; the nominal term is longer and the
enrolment larger, but the salaries are so small that only the poorest
local talent can teach. There is little supervision, there are few
appliances, few schoolhouses and no inspiration. On the other hand the
city schools have usually improved. It was natural that the Negro
should rush city-ward toward freedom, education, and decent wages.

This migration resulted in two things: in the increase and
intensification of the problems of the city, and in redoubled effort
to keep the Negro laborer on the plantations.

To take the latter efforts first, we find that the efforts of the
landlords to keep Negro labor varied from force to persuasion: force
was used by the landlords to the extent of actual peonage, by which
Negroes were held on plantations in large numbers; next to peonage for
crime came debt peonage, which used the indebtedness of the Negro
tenants to prevent their moving away; then came the system of labor
contracts and the laws making the breaking of a labor contract a crime
(see Note 10); after that came a crop of vagrancy laws aimed at the
idle Negroes in city and town and designed to compel them to work on
farms, going so far in several states as to reverse the common law
principle and force the person arrested for vagrancy to prove his
innocence (see Note 11).

In order that the farm laborers should not be tempted away by higher
wages, penalties were laid on "enticing laborers away" and agents were
compelled to take out licenses which ran as high as $2,000 for each
county in some states (see Note 12). Such laws and their
administration required, of course, absolute control of the
government and courts. This was secured by manipulation and fraud,
while at the same time the landlords of the black belt usually opposed
the disfranchisement of Negroes lest such a measure reduce their
political influence which was based on the Negro population.

All these measures were measures of force, while nothing was done to
attract laborers to the land. The only real attraction of the Negro to
the country was landowning. The Negroes had succeeded in buying land:
by government gift and bounty money they held about three million
acres in 1875, perhaps 8,000,000 in 1890, and 12,000,000 in 1900; but
distinct efforts appeared here and there to stop their buying land.

There are still vast tracts of land in the South, that anybody, black
or white, can buy for little or nothing, simply because it is worth
little or nothing. Some time, of course, these lands will become
valuable but they are not valuable to-day. Now the Negro cannot invest
in this land as a speculation, for he is too poor to wait. He must
have land which he knows how to cultivate, which is near a market, and
which is so situated as to provide reasonable protection for his
family. There are only certain crops which he knows how to cultivate.
He cannot be expected to learn quickly to cultivate crops which he was
not taught to cultivate in the past. He must be within reach of a
market and he must have some community life with his own people and
some protection from other people.

All these conditions are fulfilled chiefly in the black belt. That is
the cotton region, the crop which he knows best how to raise; from
certain parts of it he can get to the market and he has a great black
population for company and protection. But it is precisely here in the
black belt that it is most difficult to buy land. Capitalistic culture
of cotton, the high price of cotton, and the system of labor peonage
have made land high. Moreover in most of these regions it is
considered bad policy to sell Negroes land because, as has been said,
this "demoralizes" labor. Thus in the densest part of the black belt
in the South, the percentage of land holding is usually low among
Negroes.

The concentration of land-owning on the other hand in the hands of the
single white proprietors has gone on to a much larger extent than the
country realizes. This is shown not simply in the increase of the
average size of farms in the last decade but it must also be
remembered that the farms do not belong to single owners but are owned
in groups of five, forty or fifty by single landed proprietors. There
are 140,000 owners who own from two to fifty farms in the South and
there are 50,000 owners who have over twenty farms apiece.

It is not true then to-day that land-buying for the average colored
farmer in the South is an easy thing. The land which has been bought
has been bought by the exceptional men or by the men who have had
unusual opportunity, who have been helped by their former masters or
by some other patrons, who have been aided by members of their own
families in the North or in the cities, or who have escaped the
wretched crop system by some sudden rise in the price of cotton, which
did not enable the landlord to take the whole economic advantage. It
is therefore in spite of the land system and not because of it that
the Negroes to-day own 12,000,000 acres of land (see Note 13).

The net result of the whole policy of serfdom was so to deplete the
ranks of laborers that a new solution of the labor problem must be
found.

Here it was that the southern city came forward. The city had new
significance, especially new cities like Atlanta, Birmingham, and
Chattanooga as contrasted with Charleston and Savannah. They saw a
new industrial solution of the problem of Negro labor. It was a simple
program: Industry and disfranchisement; the separation of the masses
of the Negroes from all participation in government, and such
technical training as should fit them to become skilled working men.

There was an _arriere pensee_ here too, born in the minds of northern
capitalists. The white southern working men were becoming unionized by
northern agitators; here was a chance to keep them down to reasonable
demands by black competition and the threat of more competition in the
future. Moreover working men without votes would be far more docile
and tractable. Politics had already spoiled the Negroes. Let the
whites rule and the blacks work.

The plea was specious, it had the sanction of great names, of wealth
and social influence, and it convinced not only those who wanted to be
convinced but practically all Americans who were eager to be relieved
of troublesome questions and difficult public duties.

All the more eagerly was this solution seized upon because of the
definite and distinct promises which it made. Disfranchise the Negro,
said the South, and the race problem is solved; there is no race
problem save the menace of an ignorant and venal vote;--relieve us
from this and the lion and the lamb will lie down together;--the Negro
will go peacefully and contentedly to work and the whites will wax
just and rich. We all remember with what confidence and absolute
certainty of conviction this program was announced when Mississippi
disfranchised her Negro voters seventeen years ago. It was repeated
twelve years ago in South Carolina, ten years ago in Louisiana, and
still more recently in North Carolina and Alabama.

What has been the result? Is the race problem solved? Is the Negro out
of politics in the South? Has there been a single southern campaign
in the last twenty years in which the Negro has not figured as the
prime issue? Have the southern representatives in Congress any settled
convictions or policy save hatred of black men, and can they discuss
any other matter? Is it not the irony of fate that in the state that
first discovered the legal fraud of disfranchisement a hot political
battle is to-day waging on the old, old question: the right of black
men to vote?

The reason for all this is not far to seek. In modern industrial
democracy disfranchisement is impossible. The fate, wishes, and
destiny of ten million human beings cannot be delivered, sealed and
bound into the keeping of Dixon, Tillman, Vardaman, and Nelson Page.
They are bound to vote even when disfranchised.

Disfranchised and voiceless though I am in Georgia to-day by the
illegal White Primary system, there are still fifty congressmen in
Washington fraudulently representing me and my fellows in the
councils of the nation (see Note 14).

It was promised that disfranchisement would lead to more careful
attention to the Negro's moral and economic advancement. It has on the
contrary stripped them naked to their enemies; discriminating laws of
all sorts have followed, the administration of other laws has become
harsher and more unfair, school funds have been curtailed and
education discouraged, and mobs and murder have gone on.

If the new policy has been a farce politically and socially, how much
more has it failed as an economic cure-all! No sooner was it
proclaimed from the house-tops than the rift in the lute appeared. "We
do not want educated farmers," cried the landlords, "we want docile
laborers." "We do not want educated Negro artisans," cried the white
artisans, and they enforced their demands by their votes and by mob
violence. "We do not want to raise the Negro; we want to put him in
his place and keep him there," cried the dominant forces of the South.
Then those northerners who had lightly embraced the fair sounding
program of limited labor training and disfranchisement found
themselves grasping the air.

Not only this, but the South itself faced a puzzling paradox. The
industrial revolution was demanding labor; it was demanding
intelligent labor, while the supposed political and social exigences
of the situation called for ignorance and subserviency. It was an
impossible contradiction and the South to-day knows it.

What is it that makes a successful laboring force? It is laborers of
education and natural intelligence, reasonably satisfied with their
conditions, inspired with certain ideals of life, and with a growing
sense of self-respect and self-reliance. How is the caste system of
the South influencing the Negro laborer? It is systematically
restricting his development; it is restricting his education so that
the public common schools of the South except in a few cities are
worse this moment than they were twenty years ago; it is seeking to
kill self-respect by putting upon the accident of color every mark of
humiliation that it can invent; it is discouraging self-reliance by
treating a class of men as wards and children; it is killing ambition
by drawing a color line instead of a line of desert and
accomplishment; and finally, through these things, it is encouraging
crime, and by the unintelligent and brutal treatment of criminals, it
is developing more crime.

This general attitude toward the main laboring class reflects itself
less glaringly but as certainly in the treatment even of white
laborers. So long as white labor must compete with black labor, it
must approximate black labor conditions--long hours, small wages,
child labor, labor of women, and even peonage. Moreover it can raise
itself above black labor only by a legalized caste system which will
cut off competition and this is what the South is straining every
nerve to create.

The last fatal campaign in Georgia which culminated in the Atlanta
Massacre was an attempt, fathered by conscienceless politicians, to
arouse the prejudices of the rank and file of white laborers and
farmers against the growing competition of black men, so that black
men by law could be forced back to subserviency and serfdom. It
succeeded so well that smouldering hate burst into flaming murder
before the politicians could curb it.

There is, however, a limit to this sort of thing. The day when mobs
can successfully cow the Negro to willing slavery is past. The Atlanta
Negroes shot back and shot to kill, and that stopped the riot with a
certain suddenness (see Note 15). The South is realizing that
lawlessness and economic advance cannot coexist. If the wonderful
industrial revolution is to develop unhindered, the South must have
law and order and it must have intelligent workmen.

It is only a question of time when white working men and black working
men will see their common cause against the aggressions of exploiting
capitalists. Already there are signs of this: white and black miners
are working as a unit in Alabama; white and black masons are in one
union in Atlanta (see Note 16). The economic strength of the Negro
cannot be beaten into weakness, and therefore it must be taken into
partnership, and this the Southern white working man, befuddled by
prejudice as he is, begins dimly to realize.

It is this paradox that brings us to-day in the South to a fourth
solution of the problem: Immigration. The voice that calls foreign
immigrants southward to-day is not single but double. First, the
exploiter of common labor wishes to exploit this new labor just as
formerly he exploited Negro labor. On the other hand the far-sighted
ones know that the present freedom of labor exploitation must
pass--that some time or other the industrial system of the South must
be made to conform more and more to the growing sense of industrial
justice in the North and in the civilized world. Consequently the
second object of the immigration philosopher is to make sure that,
when the rights of the laborer come to be recognized in the South,
that laborer will be white, and just so far as possible the black
laborer will still be forced down below the white laborer until he
becomes thoroughly demoralized or extinct.

The query is therefore: If immigration turns toward the South as it
undoubtedly will in time, what will become of the Negro? The view of
the white world is usually that there are two possibilities. First,
that the immigrants will crush the Negro utterly; or secondly, that by
competition there will come a sifting which will lead to the survival
of the best in both groups of laborers.

Let us consider these possibilities. First it is certain that so far
as the Negroes are land holders, and so far as they belong to a
self-employing, self-supplying group economy, no possible competition
from without can disturb them. I have shown already how rapidly this
system is growing. Further than that, there is a large group of
Negroes who have already gained an assured place in the national
economy as artisans, servants, and laborers. The worst of these may be
supplanted, but the best could not be unless there came a sudden
unprecedented and improbable influx of skilled foreign labor. A slow
infiltration of foreigners cannot displace the better class of Negro
workers; simply because the growing labor demand of the South cannot
spare them. If then it is to be merely a matter of ability to work,
the result of immigration will on the whole be beneficial and will
differentiate the good Negro workman from the careless and
indifferent.

But one element remains to be considered, and this is political power.
If the black workman is to remain disfranchised while the white native
and immigrant not only has the economic defense of the ballot, but the
power to use it so as to hem in the Negro competitor, cow and
humiliate him and force him to a lower plane, then the Negro will
suffer from immigration.

It is becoming distinctly obvious to Negroes that to-day, in modern
economic organization, the one thing that is giving the workman a
chance is intelligence and political power, and that it is utterly
impossible for a moment to suppose that the Negro in the South is
going to hold his own in the new competition with immigrants if, on
the one hand, the immigrant has access to the best schools of the
community and has equal political power with other men to defend his
rights and to assert his wishes, while, on the other hand, his black
competitor is not only weighed down by past degradation, but has few
or no schools and is disfranchised.

The question then as to what will happen in the South when immigration
comes, is a very simple question. If the Negro is kept disfranchised
and ignorant and if the new foreign immigrants are allowed access to
the schools and given votes as they undoubtedly will be, then there
can ensue only accentuated race hatred, the spread of poverty and
disease among Negroes, the increase of crime, and the gradual murder
of the eight millions of black men who live in the South except in so
far as they escape North and bring their problems there as thousands
will.

If on the contrary, with the coming of the immigrants to the South,
there is given to the Negro equal educational opportunity and the
chance to cast his vote like a man and be counted as a man in the
councils of the county, city, state and nation, then there will ensue
that competition between men in the industrial world which, if it is
not altogether just, is at least better than slavery and serfdom.

There of course could be strong argument that the nation owes the
Negro something better than harsh industrial competition just after
slavery, but the Negro does not ask the payment of debts that are
dead. He is perfectly willing to come into competition with immigrants
from any part of the world, to welcome them as human beings and as
fellows in the struggle for life, to struggle with them and for them
and for a greater South and a better nation. But the black man
certainly has a right to ask, when he starts into this race, that he
be allowed to start with hands untied and brain unclouded (see Note
17).

Such in bare outline is the economic history of the South. It is the
story of an attempt to degrade working men. It failed in 1860, after
it had sought for centuries to reduce laborers to the level of
purchasable cattle; it failed in 1870, after a fearful catastrophe
while endeavoring to revive this system under another name; it has
failed since then satisfactorily to maintain the present rural serfdom
or to establish a disfranchised caste of artisans; and it will fail in
the future to keep the stubbornly up-struggling masses of black
laborers down, by shackling their souls and loading immigrants atop of
them. It will always fail unless indeed, as sometimes seems possible,
both Church and State in America shall refuse longer to listen to the
teaching of Jesus when He said: "Come unto Me all ye that labor and
are heavy-laden, and I will give you rest.

"Take My yoke upon you and learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly in
heart: and ye shall find rest for your souls.

"For My yoke is easy and My burden is light."




       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPTER IV

RELIGION IN THE SOUTH

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER IV

RELIGION IN THE SOUTH


It is often a nice question as to which is of greater importance among
a people--the way in which they earn their living, or their attitude
toward life. As a matter of fact these two things are but two sides of
the same problem, for nothing so reveals the attitude of a people
toward life as the manner in which they earn their living; and on the
other hand the earning of a living depends in the last analysis upon
one's estimate of what life really is. So that these two questions
that I am discussing with regard to the South are intimately bound up
with each other.

If we have studied the economic development of the South carefully,
then we have already seen something of its attitude toward life; the
history of religion in the South means a study of these same facts
over which we have gone, from a different point of view. Moreover, as
the economic history of the South is in effect the economics of
slavery and the Negro problem, so the essence of a study of religion
in the South is a study of the ethics of slavery and emancipation.

It is very difficult of course for one who has not seen the practical
difficulties that surround a people at any particular time in their
battle with the hard facts of this world, to interpret with sympathy
their ideals of life; and this is especially difficult when the
economic life of a nation has been expressed by such a discredited
word as slavery. If, then, we are to study the history of religion in
the South, we must first of all divest ourselves of prejudice, pro and
con; we must try to put ourselves in the place of those who are
seeking to read the riddle of life and grant to them about the same
general charity and the same general desire to do right that we find
in the average human being. On the other hand, we must not, in
striving to be charitable, be false to truth and right. Slavery in the
United States was an economic mistake and a moral crime. This we
cannot forget. Yet it had its excuses and mitigations. These we must
remember.

When in the seventeenth century there grew up in the New World a
system of human slavery, it was not by any means a new thing. There
were slaves and slavery in Europe, not, to be sure, to a great extent,
but none the less real. The Christian religion, however, had come to
regard it as wrong and unjust that those who partook of the privileges
and hopes and aspirations of that religion should oppress each other
to the extent of actual enslavement. The idea of human brotherhood in
the seventeenth century was of a brotherhood of co-religionists. When
it came to the dealing of Christian with heathen, however, the
century saw nothing wrong in slavery; rather, theoretically, they saw
a chance for a great act of humanity and religion. The slaves were to
be brought from heathenism to Christianity, and through slavery the
benighted Indian and African were to find their passport into the
kingdom of God. This theory of human slavery was held by Spaniards,
French, and English. It was New England in the early days that put the
echo of it in her codes (see Note 18) and recognition of it can be
seen in most of the colonies.

But no sooner had people adopted this theory than there came the
insistent and perplexing question as to what the status of the heathen
slave was to be after he was Christianized and baptized; and even more
pressing, what was to be the status of his children?

It took a great deal of bitter heart searching for the conscientious
early slave-holders to settle this question. The obvious state of
things was that the new convert awoke immediately to the freedom of
Christ and became a freeman. But while this was the theoretical,
religious answer, and indeed the answer which was given in several
instances, the practice soon came into direct and perplexing conflict
with the grim facts of economic life.

Here was a man who had invested his money and his labor in slaves; he
had done it with dependence on the institution of property. Could he
be deprived of his property simply because his slaves were baptized
afterward into a Christian church? Very soon such economic reasoning
swept away the theological dogma and it was expressly declared in
colony after colony that baptism did not free the slaves (see Note
19). This, of course, put an end to the old doctrine of the heathen
slave and it was necessary for the church to arrange for itself a new
theory by which it could ameliorate, if not excuse, the position of
the slave. The next question was naturally that of the children of
slaves born in Christianity and the church for a time hedged
unworthily on the subject by consigning to perpetual slavery the
children of heathen but not those born of Christian parents; this was
satisfactory for the first generation but it fell short of the logic
of slavery later, and a new adjustment was demanded.

Here again this was not found difficult. In Virginia there had been
built up the beginnings of a feudal aristocracy. Men saw nothing wrong
or unthinkable in the situation as it began to develop, but rather
something familiar. At the head of the feudal manor was the lord, or
master, beneath him the under-lord or overseers and then the artisans,
retainers, the free working men and lastly the serfs, slaves or
servants as they were called. The servant was not free and yet he was
not theoretically exactly a slave, and the laws of Virginia were
rather careful to speak very little of slaves.

Serfdom in America as in Europe was to be a matter of status or
position and not of race or blood, and the law of the South in the
seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries made little or no
distinction between black and white bondservants save in the time of
their service. The idea, felt rather than expressed, was that here in
America we were to have a new feudalism suited to the new country. At
the top was the governor of the colony representing the majesty of the
English king, at the bottom the serfs or slaves, some white, most of
them black.

Slavery therefore was gradually transformed in the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries into a social status out of which a man, even a
black man, could escape and did escape; and, no matter what his color
was, when he became free, he became free in the same sense that other
people were. Thus it was that there were free black voters in the
southern colonies (Virginia and the Carolinas) in the early days
concerning whose right to vote there was less question than there is
concerning my right to vote now in Georgia (see Note 20).

The church recognized the situation and the Episcopal church
especially gave itself easily to this new conception. This church
recognized the social gradation of men; all souls were equal in the
sight of God, but there were differences in worldly consideration and
respect, and consequently it was perfectly natural that there should
be an aristocracy at the top and a group of serfs at the bottom.

Meantime, however, America began to be stirred by a new democratic
ideal; there came the reign of that ruler of men, Andrew Jackson;
there came the spread of the democratic churches, Methodist and
Baptist, and the democratization of other churches. Now when America
became to be looked upon more and more as the dwelling place of free
and equal men and when the Methodist and, particularly, the Baptist
churches went down into the fields and proselyted among the slaves, a
thing which the more aristocratic Episcopal church had never done (see
Note 21), there came new questions and new heart-searchings among
those who wanted to explain the difficulties and to think and speak
clearly in the midst of their religious convictions.

As such people began to look round them the condition of the slaves
appalled them. The Presbyterian Synod of South Carolina and Georgia
declared in 1833: "There are over two millions of human beings in the
condition of heathen and some of them in a worse condition. They may
be justly considered the heathen of this country, and will bear a
comparison with heathen in any country in the world. The Negroes are
destitute of the gospel, and ever will be under the present state of
things. In the vast field extending from an entire state beyond the
Potomac [_i.e._, Maryland] to the Sabine River [at the time our
southwestern boundary] and from the Atlantic to the Ohio, there are,
to the best of our knowledge, not twelve men exclusively devoted to
the religious instruction of the Negroes. In the present state of
feeling in the South, a ministry of their own color could neither be
obtained nor tolerated.

"But do not the Negroes have access to the gospel through the stated
ministry of the whites? We answer, no. The Negroes have no regular and
efficient ministry; as a matter of course, no churches; neither is
there sufficient room in the white churches for their accommodation.
We know of but five churches in the slave-holding states built
expressly for their use. These are all in the state of Georgia. We may
now inquire whether they enjoy the privileges of the gospel in their
own houses, and on our plantations? Again we return a negative answer.
They have no Bibles to read by their own firesides. They have no
family altars; and when in affliction, sickness, or death, they have
no minister to address to them the consolations of the gospel, nor to
bury them with appropriate services."

The same synod said in 1834: "The gospel, as things now are, can never
be preached to the two classes (whites and blacks) successfully in
conjunction. The galleries or back seats on the lower floor of white
churches are generally appropriated to the Negroes, when it can be
done without inconvenience to the whites. When it cannot be done
conveniently, the Negroes must catch the gospel as it escapes through
the doors and windows. If the master is pious, the house servants
alone attend family worship, and frequently few of them, while the
field hands have no attention at all. So far as masters are engaged in
the work [of religious instruction of slaves], an almost unbroken
silence reigns on this vast field."

The Rev. C.C. Jones, a Georgian and ardent defender of slavery (see
Note 22) says of the period 1790-1820: "It is not too much to say that
the religious and physical condition of the Negroes were both improved
during this period. Their increase was natural and regular, ranging
every ten years between thirty-four and thirty-six per cent. As the
old stock from Africa died out of the country, the grosser customs,
ignorance, and paganism of Africa died with them. Their descendants,
the country-born, were better looking, more intelligent, more
civilized, more susceptible of religious impressions.

"On the whole, however, but a minority of the Negroes, and that a
small one, attended regularly the house of God, and taking them as a
class, their religious instruction was extensively and most seriously
neglected."

And of the decade 1830-40, he insists: "We cannot cry out against the
Papists for withholding the Scriptures from the common people and
keeping them in ignorance of the way of life, for we withhold the
Bible from our servants, and keep them in ignorance of it, while we
will not use the means to have it read and explained to them."

Such condition stirred the more radical-minded toward abolition
sentiments and the more conservative toward renewed effort to
evangelize and better the condition of the slaves. This condition was
deplorable as Jones pictures it. "Persons live and die in the midst of
Negroes and know comparatively little of their real character. They
have not the immediate management of them. They have to do with them
in the ordinary discharge of their duty as servants, further than this
they institute no inquiries; they give themselves no trouble.

"The Negroes are a distinct class in the community, and keep
themselves very much to themselves. They are one thing before the
whites and another before their own color. Deception before the former
is characteristic of them, whether bond or free, throughout the whole
United States. It is habit, a long established custom, which descends
from generation to generation. There is an upper and an under current.
Some are contented with the appearance on the surface; others dive
beneath. Hence the diversity of impressions and representations of the
moral and religious condition of the Negroes. Hence the disposition of
some to deny the darker pictures of their more searching and knowing
friends."

He then enumerates the vice of the slaves: "The divine institution of
marriage depends for its perpetuity, sacredness, and value, largely
upon the protection given it by the law of the land. Negro marriages
are neither recognized nor protected by law. The Negroes receive no
instruction on the nature, sacredness, and perpetuity of the
institution; at any rate they are far from being duly impressed with
these things. They are not required to be married in any particular
form, nor by any particular persons."

He continues: "Hence, as may well be imagined, the marriage relation
loses much of the sacredness and perpetuity of its character. It is a
contract of convenience, profit, or pleasure, that may be entered into
and dissolved at the will of the parties, and that without heinous
sin, or the injury of the property or interests of any one. That which
they possess in common is speedily divided, and the support of the
wife and children falls not upon the husband, but upon the master.
Protracted sickness, want of industrial habits, of congeniality of
disposition, or disparity of age, are sufficient grounds for a
separation."

Under such circumstances, "polygamy is practiced both secretly and
openly." Un-cleanness, infanticide, theft, lying, quarreling, and
fighting are noted, and the words of Charles Cotesworth Pinckney in
1829 are recalled: "There needs no stronger illustration of the
doctrine of human depravity than the state of morals on plantations in
general. Besides the mischievous tendency of bad example in parents
and elders, the little Negro is often taught by these natural
instructors that he may commit any vice that he can conceal from his
superiors, and thus falsehood and deception are among the earliest
lessons they imbibe. Their advance in years is but a progression to
the higher grades of iniquity. The violation of the Seventh
Commandment is viewed in a more venial light than in fashionable
European circles. Their depredations of rice have been estimated to
amount to twenty-five per cent. of the gross average of crops."

John Randolph of Roanoke once visited a lady and "found her surrounded
with her seamstresses, making up a quantity of clothing. 'What work
have you in hand?' 'O sir, I am preparing this clothing to send to the
poor Greeks.' On taking leave at the steps of her mansion, he saw
some of her servants in need of the very clothing which their
tender-hearted mistress was sending abroad. He exclaimed, 'Madam,
madam, the Greeks are at your door!'"

One natural solution of this difficulty was to train teachers and
preachers for the slaves from among their own number. The old Voodoo
priests were passing away and already here and there new spiritual
leaders of the Negroes began to arise. Accounts of several of these,
taken from "The Negro Church," will be given.

Among the earliest was Harry Hosier who traveled with the Methodist
Bishop Asbury and often filled appointments for him. George Leile and
Andrew Bryan were preachers whose life history is of intense interest.
"George Leile or Lisle, sometimes called George Sharp, was born in
Virginia about 1750. His master (Mr. Sharp) some time before the
American war removed and settled in Burke County, Georgia. Mr. Sharp
was a Baptist and a deacon in a Baptist church, of which Rev. Matthew
Moore was pastor. George was converted and baptized under Mr. Moore's
ministry. The church gave him liberty to preach.

"About nine months after George Leile left Georgia, Andrew, surnamed
Bryan, a man of good sense, great zeal, and some natural elocution,
began to exhort his black brethren and friends. He and his followers
were reprimanded and forbidden to engage further in religious
exercises. He would, however, pray, sing, and encourage his fellow
worshipers to seek the Lord.

"Their persecution was carried to an inhuman extent. Their evening
assemblies were broken up and those found present were punished with
stripes. Andrew Bryan and Sampson, his brother, converted about a year
after him, were twice imprisoned, and they with about fifty others
were whipped. When publicly whipped, and bleeding under his wounds,
Andrew declared that he not only rejoiced to be whipped, but would
gladly suffer death for the cause of Jesus Christ, and that while he
had life and opportunity he would continue to preach Christ. He was
faithful to his vow and, by patient continuance in well-doing, he put
to silence and shamed his adversaries, and influential advocates and
patrons were raised up for him. Liberty was given Andrew by the civil
authority to continue his religious meetings under certain
regulations. His master gave him the use of his barn at Brampton,
three miles from Savannah, where he preached for two years with little
interruption."

Lott Carey a free Virginia Negro "was evidently a man of superior
intellect and force of character, as is evidenced from the fact that
his reading took a wide range--from political economy, in Adam Smith's
'Wealth of Nations,' to the voyage of Captain Cook. That he was a
worker as well as a preacher is true, for when he decided to go to
Africa his employers offered to raise his salary from $800 to $1,000 a
year. Remember that this was over eighty years ago. Carey was not
seduced by such a flattering offer, for he was determined.

"His last sermon in the old First Church in Richmond must have been
exceedingly powerful, for it was compared by an eye-witness, a
resident of another state, to the burning, eloquent appeals of George
Whitfield. Fancy him as he stands there in that historic building
ringing the changes on the word 'freely,' depicting the willingness
with which he was ready to give up his life for service in Africa.

"He, as you may already know, was the leader of the pioneer colony to
Liberia, where he arrived even before the agent of the Colonization
Society. In his new home his abilities were recognized, for he was
made vice governor, and became governor in fact while Governor Ashmun
was absent from the colony in this country. Carey did not allow his
position to betray the cause of his people, for he did not hesitate to
expose the duplicity of the Colonization Society and even to defy
their authority, it would seem, in the interests of the people.

"While casting cartridges to defend the colonists against the natives
in 1828, the accidental upsetting of a candle caused an explosion that
resulted in his death.

"Carey is described as a typical Negro, six feet in height, of massive
and erect frame, with the sinews of a Titan. He had a square face,
keen eyes, and a grave countenance. His movements were measured; in
short, he had all the bearing and dignity of a prince of the blood."

John Chavis was a full-blooded Negro, born in Granville County, N.C.,
near Oxford, in 1763. He was born free and was sent to Princeton,
studying privately under Dr. Witherspoon, where he did well. He went
to Virginia to preach to Negroes. In 1802, in the county court, his
freedom and character were certified to and it was declared that he
had passed "through a regular course of academic studies" at what is
now Washington and Lee University. In 1805 he returned to North
Carolina, where in 1809 he was made a licentiate in the Presbyterian
Church and allowed to preach. His English was remarkably pure, his
manner impressive, his explanations clear and concise.

For a long time he taught school and had the best whites as pupils--a
United States senator, the sons of a chief justice of North Carolina,
a governor of the state and many others. Some of his pupils boarded in
the family, and his school was regarded as the best in the State. "All
accounts agree that John Chavis was a gentleman," and he was received
socially among the best whites and asked to table. In 1830 he was
stopped from preaching by the law. Afterward he taught a school for
free Negroes in Raleigh.

Henry Evans was a full-blooded Virginia free Negro, and was the
pioneer of Methodism in Fayetteville, N.C. He found the Negroes there,
about 1800, without any religious instruction. He began preaching and
the town council ordered him away; he continued and whites came to
hear him. Finally the white auditors outnumbered the blacks and sheds
were erected for Negroes at the side of the church. The gathering
became a regular Methodist Church, with a white and Negro membership,
but Evans continued to preach. He exhibited "rare self-control before
the most wretched of castes! Henry Evans did much good, but he would
have done more good had his spirit been untrammeled by this sense of
inferiority."

His dying words uttered as he stood, aged and bent beside his pulpit,
are of singular pathos: "I have come to say my last word to you. It
is this: None but Christ. Three times have I had my life in jeopardy
for preaching the gospel to you. Three times I have broken ice on the
edge of the water and swam across the Cape Fear to preach the gospel
to you; and, if in my last hour I could trust to that, or anything but
Christ crucified, for my salvation, all should be lost and my soul
perish forever."

Early in the nineteenth century Ralph Freeman was a slave in Anson
County, N.C. He was a full-blooded Negro, and was ordained and became
an able Baptist preacher. He baptized and administered communion, and
was greatly respected. When the Baptists split on the question of
missions he sided with the anti-mission side. Finally the law forbade
him to preach.

Lunsford Lane was a Negro who bought his freedom in Raleigh, N.C., by
the manufacture of smoking tobacco. He later became a minister of the
gospel, and had the confidence of many of the best people.

The story of Jack of Virginia is best told in the words of a Southern
writer:

"Probably the most interesting case in the whole South is that of an
African preacher of Nottoway County, popularly known as 'Uncle Jack,'
whose services to white and black were so valuable that a
distinguished minister of the Southern Presbyterian Church felt called
upon to memorialize his work in a biography.

"Kidnapped from his idolatrous parents in Africa, he was brought over
in one of the last cargoes of slaves admitted to Virginia and sold to
a remote and obscure planter in Nottoway County, a region at that time
in the backwoods and destitute particularly as to religious life and
instruction. He was converted under the occasional preaching of Rev.
Dr. John Blair Smith, president of Hampden-Sidney College, and of Dr.
William Hill and Dr. Archibald Alexander of Princeton, then young
theologues, and by hearing the Scriptures read.

"Taught by his master's children to read, he became so full of the
spirit and knowledge of the Bible that he was recognized among the
whites as a powerful expounder of Christian doctrine, was licensed to
preach by the Baptist Church, and preached from plantation to
plantation within a radius of thirty miles, as he was invited by
overseers or masters. His freedom was purchased by a subscription of
whites, and he was given a home and tract of land for his support. He
organized a large and orderly Negro church, and exercised such a
wonderful controlling influence over the private morals of his flock
that masters, instead of punishing their slaves, often referred them
to the discipline of their pastor, which they dreaded far more.

"He stopped a heresy among the Negroes of Southern Virginia, defeating
in open argument a famous fanatical Negro preacher named Campbell, who
advocated noise and 'the spirit' against the Bible, and winning over
Campbell's adherents in a body. For over forty years, and until he was
nearly a hundred years of age, he labored successfully in public and
private among black and whites, voluntarily giving up his preaching in
obedience to the law of 1832, the result of 'Old Nat's war.'

"The most refined and aristocratic people paid tribute to him, and he
was instrumental in the conversion of many whites. Says his
biographer, Rev. Dr. William S. White: 'He was invited into their
houses, sat with their families, took part in their social worship,
sometimes leading the prayer at the family altar. Many of the most
intelligent people attended upon his ministry and listened to his
sermons with great delight. Indeed, previous to the year 1825, he was
considered by the best judges to be the best preacher in that county.
His opinions were respected, his advice followed, and yet he never
betrayed the least symptoms of arrogance or self-conceit.

"'His dwelling was a rude log cabin, his apparel of the plainest and
coarsest materials.' This was because he wanted to be fully identified
with his class. He refused gifts of better clothing, saying 'These
clothes are a great deal better than are generally worn by people of
my color, and besides if I wear finer ones I find I shall be obliged
to think about them even at meeting.'"

Thus slowly, surely, the slave, in the persons of such exceptional
men, appearing here and there at rare intervals, was persistently
stretching upward. The Negroes bade fair in time to have their
leaders. The new democratic evangelism began to encourage this, and
then came the difficulty--the inevitable ethical paradox.

The good men of the South recognized the needs of the slaves. Here and
there Negro ministers were arising. What now should be the policy? On
the part of the best thinkers it seemed as if men might strive here,
in spite of slavery, after brotherhood; that the slaves should be
proselyted, taught religion, admitted to the churches, and,
notwithstanding their civil station, looked upon as the spiritual
brothers of the white communicants. Much was done to make this true.
The conditions improved in a great many respects, but no sooner was
there a systematic effort to teach the slaves, even though that
teaching was confined to elementary religion, than the various things
followed that must follow all intellectual awakenings.

We have had the same thing in our day. A few Negroes of the South have
been taught, they consequently have begun to think, they have begun to
assert themselves, and suddenly men are face to face with the fact
that either one of two things must happen--either they must stop
teaching or these people are going to be men, not serfs or slaves. Not
only that, but to seek to put an awakening people back to sleep means
revolt. It meant revolt in the eighteenth century, when a series of
insurrections and disturbances frightened the South tremendously, not
so much by their actual extent as by the possibilities they suggested.
It was noticeable that many of these revolts were led by preachers.

The revolution in Hayti greatly stirred the South and induced South
Carolina to declare in 1800:

"It shall not be lawful for any number of slaves, free Negroes,
mulattoes, or mestizoes, even in company with white persons, to meet
together and assemble for the purpose of mental instruction or
religious worship either before the rising of the sun or after the
going down of the same. And all magistrates, sheriffs, militia
officers, etc., etc., are hereby vested with power, etc., for
dispersing such assemblies."

On petition of the white churches the rigor of this law was slightly
abated in 1803 by a modification which forbade any person, before nine
o'clock in the evening, "to break into a place of meeting wherein
shall be assembled the members of any religious society in this State,
provided a majority of them shall be white persons, or otherwise to
disturb their devotions unless such persons, etc., so entering said
place (of worship) shall first have obtained from some magistrate,
etc., a warrant, etc., in case a magistrate shall be then actually
within a distance of three miles from such place of meeting; otherwise
the provisions, etc. (of the Act of 1800) to remain in full force."

So, too, in Virginia the Haytian revolt and the attempted insurrection
under Gabriel in 1800 led to the Act of 1804, which forbade all
evening meetings of slaves. This was modified in 1805 so as to allow a
slave, in company with a white person, to listen to a white minister
in the evening. A master was "allowed" to employ a religious teacher
for his slaves. Mississippi passed similar restrictions.

By 1822 the rigor of the South Carolina laws in regard to Negro
meetings had abated, especially in a city like Charleston, and one of
the results was the Vesey plot.

"The sundry religious classes or congregations, with Negro leaders or
local preachers, into which were formed the Negro members of the
various churches of Charleston, furnished Vesey with the first
rudiments of an organization, and at the same time with a singularly
safe medium for conducting his underground agitation. It was
customary, at that time, for these Negro congregations to meet for
purposes of worship entirely free from the presence of whites. Such
meetings were afterward forbidden to be held except in the presence of
at least one representative of the dominant race, but during the three
or four years prior to the year 1822 they certainly offered Denmark
Vesey regular, easy, and safe opportunity for preaching his gospel of
liberty and hate. And we are left in no doubt whatever in regard to
the uses to which he put those gatherings of blacks.

"Like many of his race, he possessed the gift of gab, as the silver in
the tongue and the gold in the full or thick-lipped mouth are
oftentimes contemptuously characterized. And, like many of his race,
he was a devoted student of the Bible, to whose interpretation he
brought, like many other Bible students not confined to the Negro
race, a good deal of imagination and not a little of superstition,
which, with some natures, is perhaps but another name for the desires
of the heart.

"Thus equipped, it is no wonder that Vesey, as he pored over the Old
Testament scriptures, found many points of similitude in the history
of the Jews and that of the slaves in the United States. They were
both peculiar peoples. They were both Jehovah's peculiar peoples, one
in the past, the other in the present. And it seemed to him that as
Jehovah bent His ear, and bared His arm once in behalf of the one, so
would He do the same for the other. It was all vividly real to his
thought, I believe, for to his mind thus had said the Lord.

"He ransacked the Bible for apposite and terrible texts whose commands
in the olden times, to the olden people, were no less imperative upon
the new times and the new people. This new people were also commanded
to arise and destroy their enemies and the city in which they dwelt,
'both man and woman, young and old, with the edge of the sword.'
Believing superstitiously as he did in the stern and Nemesis-like God
of the Old Testament he looked confidently for a day of vengeance and
retribution for the blacks. He felt, I doubt not, something peculiarly
applicable to his enterprise and intensely personal to himself in the
stern and exultant prophecy of Zachariah, fierce and sanguinary words,
which were constantly in his mouth: 'Then shall the Lord go forth and
fight against those nations as when He fought in the day of battle.'
According to Vesey's lurid exegesis 'those nations' in the text meant
beyond peradventure the cruel masters, and Jehovah was to go forth to
fight them for the poor slaves and on whichever side fought that day
the Almighty God on that side would assuredly rest victory and
deliverance.

"It will not be denied that Vesey's plan contemplated the total
annihilation of the white population of Charleston. Nursing for many
dark years the bitter wrongs of himself and race had filled him
without doubt with a mad spirit of revenge and had given to him a
decided predilection for shedding the blood of his oppressors. But if
he intended to kill them to satisfy a desire for vengeance he intended
to do so also on broader ground. The conspirators, he argued, had no
choice in the matter, but were compelled to adopt a policy of
extermination by the necessity of their position. The liberty of the
blacks was in the balance of fate against the lives of the whites. He
could strike that balance in favor of the blacks only by the total
destruction of the whites. Therefore the whites, men, women, and
children, were doomed to death."[1]

Vesey's plot was well laid, but the conspirators were betrayed.

Less than ten years after this plot was discovered and Vesey and his
associates hanged, there broke out the Nat Turner insurrection in
Virginia. Turner was himself a preacher.

"He was a Christian and a man. He was conscious that he was a Man and
not a 'thing'; therefore, driven by religious fanaticism, he undertook
a difficult and bloody task. Nathaniel Turner was born in Southampton
County, Virginia, October 2, 1800. His master was one Benjamin Turner,
a very wealthy and aristocratic man. He owned many slaves, and was a
cruel and exacting master. Young 'Nat' was born of slave parents, and
carried to his grave many of the superstitions and traits of his
father and mother. The former was a preacher, the latter a 'mother in
Israel.' Both were unlettered but, nevertheless, very pious people.

"The mother began when Nat was quite young to teach him that he was
born, like Moses, to be the deliverer of his race. She would sing to
him snatches of wild, rapturous songs and repeat portions of prophecy
she had learned from the preachers of those times. Nat listened with
reverence and awe, and believed everything his mother said. He imbibed
the deep religious character of his parents, and soon manifested a
desire to preach. He was solemnly set apart to 'the gospel ministry'
by his father, the church, and visiting preachers. He was quite low in
stature, dark, and had the genuine African features. His eyes were
small but sharp, and gleamed like fire when he was talking about his
'mission' or preaching from some prophetic passage of scripture. It is
said that he never laughed. He was a dreamy sort of a man, and avoided
the crowd.

"Like Moses he lived in the solitudes of the mountains and brooded
over the condition of his people. There was something grand to him in
the rugged scenery that nature had surrounded him with. He believed
that he was a prophet, a leader raised up by God to burst the bolts of
the prison-house and set the oppressed free. The thunder, the hail,
the storm-cloud, the air, the earth, the stars, at which he would sit
and gaze half the night all spake the language of the God of the
oppressed. He was seldom seen in a large company, and never drank a
drop of ardent spirits. Like John the Baptist, when he had delivered
his message, he would retire to the fastness of the mountain or seek
the desert, where he could meditate upon his great work."

In the impression of the Richmond _Enquirer_ of the 30th of August,
1831, the first editorial or leader is under the caption of "The
Banditte." The editor says:

"They remind one of a parcel of blood-thirsty wolves rushing down from
the Alps; or, rather, like a former incursion of the Indians upon the
white settlements. Nothing is spared; neither age nor sex
respected--the helplessness of women and children pleads in vain for
mercy.... The case of Nat Turner warns us. No black man ought to be
permitted to turn preacher through the country. The law must be
enforced, or the tragedy of Southampton appeals to us in vain."

Mr. Gray, the man to whom Turner made his confession before dying,
said:

"It has been said that he was ignorant and cowardly and that his
object was to murder and rob for the purpose of obtaining money to
make his escape. It is notorious that he was never known to have a
dollar in his life, to swear an oath, or drink a drop of spirits. As
to his ignorance, he certainly never had the advantages of an
education, but he can read and write, and for natural intelligence and
quickness of apprehension is surpassed by few men I have ever seen. As
to his being a coward, his reason as given for not resisting Mr.
Phipps, shows the decision of his character. When he saw Mr. Phipps
present his gun, he said he knew it was impossible for him to escape
as the woods were full of men. He, therefore, thought it was better
for him to surrender and trust to fortune for his escape.

"He is a complete fanatic or plays his part most admirably. On other
subjects he possesses an uncommon share of intelligence, with a mind
capable of attaining anything, but warped and perverted by the
influence of early impressions. He is below the ordinary stature,
though strong and active, having the true Negro face, every feature of
which is strongly marked.

"I shall not attempt to describe the effect of his narrative, as told
and commented on by himself, in the condemned hole of the prison; the
calm deliberate composure with which he spoke of his late deeds and
intentions; the expression of his fiend-like face when excited by
enthusiasm, still bearing the stains of the blood of the helpless
innocence about him, clothed with rags and covered with chains, yet
daring to raise his manacled hand to Heaven, with a spirit soaring
above the attributes of man. I looked on him and the blood curdled in
my veins."[2]

The Turner insurrection is so connected with the economic revolution
which enthroned cotton that it marks an epoch in the history of the
slave. A wave of legislation passed over the South prohibiting the
slaves from learning to read and write, forbidding Negroes to preach,
and interfering with Negro religious meetings.

Virginia declared, in 1831, that neither slaves nor free Negroes might
preach, nor could they attend religious service at night without
permission. In North Carolina slaves and free Negroes were forbidden
to preach, exhort or teach "in any prayer-meeting or other association
for worship where slaves of different families are collected together"
on penalty of not more than thirty-nine lashes. Maryland and Georgia
had similar laws. The Mississippi law of 1831 said: It is "unlawful
for any slave, free Negro, or mulatto to preach the gospel" upon pain
of receiving thirty-nine lashes upon the naked back of the
presumptuous preacher. If a Negro received written permission from his
master he might preach to the Negroes in his immediate neighborhood,
providing six respectable white men, owners of slaves, were present.
In Alabama the law of 1832 prohibited the assembling of more than five
male slaves at any place off the plantation to which they belonged,
but nothing in the act was to be considered as forbidding attendance
at places of public worship held by white persons. No slave or free
person of color was permitted to "preach, exhort, or harangue any
slave or slaves, or free persons of color, except in the presence of
five respectable slaveholders, or unless the person preaching was
licensed by some regular body of professing Christians in the
neighborhood, to whose society or church the Negroes addressed
properly belonged."

In the District of Columbia the free Negroes began to leave white
churches in 1831 and to assemble in their own.

Thus it was that through the fear of insurrection, the economic press
of the new slavery that was arising, and the new significance of
slavery in the economics of the South, the strife for spiritual
brotherhood was given up. Slavery became distinctly a matter of race
and not of status. Long years before, the white servants had been
freed and only black servants were left; now social condition came to
be not simply a matter of slavery but a matter of belonging to the
black race, so that even the free Negroes began to be disfranchised
and put into the caste system (see Note 23).

A new adjustment of ethics and religion had to be made to meet this
new situation, and in the adjustment, no matter what might be said or
thought, the Negro and slavery had to be the central thing.

In the adjustment of religion and ethics that was made for the new
slavery, under the cotton kingdom, there was in the first place a
distinct denial of human brotherhood. These black men were not men in
the sense that white men were men. They were different--different in
kind, different in origin; they had different diseases (see Note 24);
they had different feelings; they were not to be treated the same;
they were not looked upon as the same; they were altogether apart and,
while perhaps they had certain low sensibilities and aspirations, yet
so far as this world is concerned, there could be with them neither
human nor spiritual brotherhood.

The only status that they could possibly occupy was the status of
slaves. They could not get along as freemen; they could not work as
freemen; it was utterly unthinkable that people should live with them
free. This was the philosophy that was worked out gradually, with
exceptions here and there, and that was thought through, written on,
preached from the pulpits and taught in the homes, until people in the
South believed it as they believed the rising and the setting of the
sun.

As this became more and more the orthodox ethical opinion, heretics
appeared in the land as they always do. But intolerance and anathema
met them. In community after community there was a demand for
orthodoxy on this one burning question of the economic and religious
South, and the heretics were driven out. The Quakers left North
Carolina, the abolitionists either left Virginia or ceased to talk,
and throughout the South those people who dared to think otherwise
were left silent or dead (see Note 25).

So long as slavery was an economic success this orthodoxy was all
powerful; when signs of economic distress appeared it became
intolerant and aggressive. A great moral battle was impending in the
South, but political turmoil and a development of northern thought so
rapid as to be unintelligible in the South stopped this development
forcibly. War came and the hatred and moral bluntness incident to war,
and men crystallized in their old thought.

The matter now could no longer be argued and thought out, it became a
matter of tradition, of faith, of family and personal honor. There
grew up therefore after the war a new predicament; a new-old paradox.
Upon the whites hung the curse of the past; because they had not
settled their labor problem then, they must settle the problem now in
the face of upheaval and handicapped by the natural advance of the
world.

So after the war and even to this day, the religious and ethical life
of the South bows beneath this burden. Shrinking from facing the
burning ethical questions that front it unrelentingly, the Southern
Church clings all the more closely to the letter of a worn out
orthodoxy, while its inner truer soul crouches before and fears to
answer the problem of eight million black neighbors. It therefore
assiduously "preaches Christ crucified," in prayer meeting _patois_,
and crucifies "Niggers" in unrelenting daily life.

While the Church in the North, all too slowly but surely is struggling
up from the ashes of a childish faith in myth and miracle, and
beginning to preach a living gospel of civic virtue, peace and good
will and a crusade against lying, stealing and snobbery, the Southern
church for the most part is still murmuring of modes of "baptism,"
"infant damnation" and the "divine plan of creation."

Thus the post-bellum ethical paradox of the South is far more puzzling
than the economic paradox. To be sure there is leaven in the lump.
There are brave voices here and there, but they are easily drowned by
social tyranny in the South and by indifference and sensationalism in
the North (see Note 26).

First of all the result of the war was the complete expulsion of
Negroes from white churches. Little has been said of this, but perhaps
it was in itself the most singular and tremendous result of slavery.
The Methodist Church South simply set its Negro members bodily out of
doors. They did it with some consideration for their feelings, with as
much kindliness as crass unkindliness can show, but they virtually
said to all their black members--to the black mammies whom they have
almost fulsomely praised and whom they remember in such astonishing
numbers to-day, to the polite and deferential old servant, to whose
character they build monuments--they said to them: "You cannot worship
God with us." There grew up, therefore, the Colored Methodist
Episcopal Church.

Flagrantly unchristian as this course was, it was still in some ways
better than the absolute withdrawal of church fellowship on the part
of the Baptists, or the policy of Episcopalians, which was simply that
of studied neglect and discouragement which froze, harried, and well
nigh invited the black communicants to withdraw.

From the North now came those Negro church bodies born of color
discrimination in Philadelphia and New York in the eighteenth century,
and thus a Christianity absolutely divided along the color line arose.
There may be in the South a black man belonging to a white church
to-day but if so, he must be very old and very feeble. This
anomaly--this utter denial of the very first principles of the ethics
of Jesus Christ--is to-day so deep seated and unquestionable a
principle of Southern Christianity that its essential heathenism is
scarcely thought of, and every revival of religion in this section
banks its spiritual riches solidly and unmovedly against the color
line, without conscious question.

Among the Negroes the results are equally unhappy. They needed ethical
leadership, spiritual guidance, and religious instruction. If the
Negroes of the South are to any degree immoral, sexually unchaste,
criminally inclined, and religiously ignorant, what right has the
Christian South even to whisper reproach or accusation? How often have
they raised a finger to assume spiritual or religious guardianship
over those victims of their past system of economic and social life?

Left thus unguided the Negroes, with some help from such Northern
white churches as dared, began their own religious upbuilding (see
Note 27). They faced tremendous difficulties--lack of ministers,
money, and experience. Their churches could not be simply centres of
religious life--because in the poverty of their organized efforts all
united striving tended to centre in this one social organ. The Negro
Church consequently became a great social institution with some
ethical ideas but with those ethical ideas warped and changed and
perverted by the whole history of the past; with memories, traditions,
and rites of heathen worship, of intense emotionalism, trance, and
weird singing.

And above all, there brooded over and in the church the sense of all
their grievances. Whatsoever their own shortcomings might be, at least
they knew that they were not guilty of hypocrisy; they did not cry
"Whosoever will" and then brazenly ostracize half the world. They
knew that they opened their doors and hearts wide to all people that
really wanted to come in and they looked upon the white churches not
as examples but with a sort of silent contempt and a real inner
questioning of the genuineness of their Christianity.

On the other hand, so far as the white post-bellum Christian church is
concerned, I can conceive no more pitiable paradox than that of the
young white Christian in the South to-day who really believes in the
ethics of Jesus Christ. What can he think when he hangs upon his
church doors the sign that I have often seen, "All are welcome." He
knows that half the population of his city would not dare to go inside
that church. Or if there was any fellowship between Christians, white
and black, it would be after the manner explained by a white
Mississippi clergyman in all seriousness: "The whites and Negroes
understand each other here perfectly, sir, perfectly; if they come to
my church they take a seat in the gallery. If I go to theirs, they
invite me to the front pew or the platform."

Once in Atlanta a great revival was going on in a prominent white
church. The people were at fever heat, the minister was preaching and
calling "Come to Jesus." Up the aisle tottered an old black man--he
was an outcast, he had wandered in there aimlessly off the streets,
dimly he had comprehended this call and he came tottering and swaying
up the aisle. What was the result? It broke up the revival. There was
no disturbance; he was gently led out, but that sudden appearance of a
black face spoiled the whole spirit of the thing and the revival was
at an end.

Who can doubt that if Christ came to Georgia to-day one of His first
deeds would be to sit down and take supper with black men, and who can
doubt the outcome if He did?

It is this tremendous paradox of a Christianity that theoretically
opens the church to all men and yet closes it forcibly and insultingly
in the face of black men and that does this not simply in the visible
church but even more harshly in the spiritual fellowship of human
souls--it is this that makes the ethical and religious problem in the
South to-day of such tremendous importance, and that gives rise to the
one thing which it seems to me is the most difficult in the Southern
situation and that is, the tendency to deny the truth, the tendency to
lie when the real situation comes up because the truth is too hard to
face. This lying about the situation of the South has not been simply
a political subterfuge against the dangers of ignorance, but is a sort
of gasping inner revolt against acknowledging the real truth of the
ethical conviction which every true Southerner must feel, namely: that
the South is eternally and fundamentally wrong on the plain straight
question of the equality of souls before God--of the inalienable
rights of all men.

Here are men--they are aspiring, they are struggling piteously
forward, they have frequent instances of ability, there is no doubt as
to the tremendous strides which certain classes of Negroes have
made--how shall they be treated? That they should be treated as men,
of course, the best class of Southerners know and sometimes
acknowledge. And yet they believe, and believe with fierce conviction,
that it is impossible to treat Negroes as men, and still live with
them. Right there is the paradox which they face daily and which is
daily stamping hypocrisy upon their religion and upon their land.

Their irresistible impulse in this awful dilemma is to point to and
emphasize the Negro's degradation, even though they know that it is
not the degraded Negro whom they most fear, ostracize, and fight to
keep down, but rather the rising, ambitious Negro.

If my own city of Atlanta had offered it to-day the choice between 500
Negro college graduates--forceful, busy, ambitious men of property and
self-respect, and 500 black cringing vagrants and criminals, the
popular vote in favor of the criminals would be simply overwhelming.
Why? because they want Negro crime? No, not that they fear Negro crime
less, but that they fear Negro ambition and success more. They can
deal with crime by chain-gang and lynch law, or at least they think
they can, but the South can conceive neither machinery nor place for
the educated, self-reliant, self-assertive black man.

Are a people pushed to such moral extremities, the ones whose
level-headed, unbiased statements of fact concerning the Negro can be
relied upon? Do they really know the Negro? Can the nation expect of
them the poise and patience necessary for the settling of a great
social problem?

Not only is there then this initial falseness when the South excuses
its ethical paradox by pointing to the low condition of the Negro
masses, but there is also a strange blindness in failing to see that
every pound of evidence to prove the present degradation of black men
but adds to the crushing weight of indictment against their past
treatment of this race.

A race is not made in a single generation. If they accuse Negro women
of lewdness and Negro men of monstrous crime, what are they doing but
advertising to the world the shameless lewdness of those Southern men
who brought millions of mulattoes into the world, and whose deeds
throughout the South and particularly in Virginia, the mother of
slavery, have left but few prominent families whose blood does not
to-day course in black veins? Suppose to-day Negroes do steal; who
was it that for centuries made stealing a virtue by stealing their
labor? Have not laziness and listlessness always been the followers of
slavery? If these ten millions are ignorant by whose past law and
mandate and present practice is this true?

The truth then cannot be controverted. The present condition of the
Negro in America is better than the history of slavery proves we might
reasonably expect. With the help of his friends, North and South, and
despite the bitter opposition of his foes, South and North, he has
bought twelve million acres of land, swept away two-thirds of his
illiteracy, organized his church, and found leadership and articulate
voice. Yet despite this the South, Christian and unchristian, with
only here and there an exception, still stands like a rock wall and
says: Negroes are not men and must not be treated as men.

When now the world faces such an absolute ethical contradiction, the
truth is nearer than it seems.

It stands to-day perfectly clear and plain despite all sophistication
and false assumption: If the contention of the South is true--that
Negroes cannot by reason of hereditary inferiority take their places
in modern civilization beside white men, then the South owes it to the
world and to its better self to give the Negro every chance to prove
this. To make the assertion dogmatically and then resort to all means
which retard and restrict Negro development is not simply to stand
convicted of insincerity before the civilized world, but, far worse
than that, it is to make a nation of naturally generous, honest people
to sit humiliated before their own consciences.

I believe that a straightforward, honorable treatment of black men
according to their desert and achievement, will soon settle the Negro
problem. If the South is right few will rise to a plane that will
make their social reception a matter worth consideration; few will
gain the sobriety and industry which will deserve the ballot; and few
will achieve such solid moral character as will give them welcome to
the fellowship of the church. If, on the other hand, Negroes with the
door of opportunity thrown wide do become men of industry and
achievement, of moral strength and even genius, then such rise will
silence the South with an eternal silence.

The nation that enslaved the Negro owes him this trial; the section
that doggedly and unreasonably kept him in slavery owes him at least
this chance; and the church which professes to follow Jesus Christ and
does not insist on this elemental act of justice merits the denial of
the Master--"_I never knew you._"

This, then, is the history of those mighty moral battles in the South
which have given us the Negro problem. And the last great battle is
not a battle of South or East, of black or white, but of all of us.
The path to racial peace is straight but narrow--its following to-day
means tremendous fight against inertia, prejudice, and intrenched
snobbery. But it is the duty of men, it is a duty of the church, to
face the problem. Not only is it their duty to face it--they _must_
face it, it is impossible not to, the very attempt to ignore it is
assuming an attitude. It is a problem not simply of political
expediency, of economic success, but a problem above all of religious
and social life; and it carries with it not simply a demand for its
own solution, but beneath it lies the whole question of the real
intent of our civilization: Is the civilization of the United States
Christian?

It is a matter of grave consideration what answer we ought to give to
that question. The precepts of Jesus Christ cannot but mean that
Christianity consists of an attitude of humility, of a desire for
peace, of a disposition to treat our brothers as we would have our
brothers treat us, of mercy and charity toward our fellow men, of
willingness to suffer persecution for right ideals and in general of
love not only toward our friends but even toward our enemies.

Judged by this, it is absurd to call the practical religion of this
nation Christian. We are not humble, we are impudently proud; we are
not merciful, we are unmerciful toward friend and foe; we are not
peaceful nor peacefully inclined as our armies and battle-ships
declare; we do not want to be martyrs, we would much rather be thieves
and liars so long as we can be rich; we do not seek continuously, and
prayerfully inculcate, love and justice for our fellow men, but on the
contrary the treatment of the poor, the unfortunate, and the black
within our borders is almost a national crime.

The problem that lies before Christians is tremendous (see Note 28),
and the answer must begin not by a slurring over of the one problem
where these different tests of Christianity are most flagrantly
disregarded, but it must begin by a girding of ourselves and a
determination to see that justice is done in this country to the
humblest and blackest as well as to the greatest and whitest of our
citizens.

Now a word especially about the Episcopal church, whose position
toward its Negro communicants is peculiar. I appreciate this position
and speak of it specifically because I am one of those communicants.
For four generations my family has belonged to this church and I
belong to it, not by personal choice, not because I feel myself
welcome within its portals, but simply because I refuse to be read
outside of a church which is mine by inheritance and the service of my
fathers. When the Episcopal church comes, as it does come to-day, to
the Parting of the Ways, to the question as to whether its record in
the future is going to be, on the Negro problem, as disgraceful as it
has been in the past, I feel like appealing to all who are members of
that church to remember that after all it is a church of Jesus Christ.
Your creed and your duty enjoin upon you one, and only one, course of
procedure.

In the real Christian church there is neither black nor white, rich
nor poor, barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free, but all stand equal
before the face of the Master. If you find that you cannot treat your
Negro members as fellow Christians then do not deceive yourselves into
thinking that the differences that you make or are going to make in
their treatment are made for their good or for the service of the
world; do not entice them to ask for a separation which your
unchristian conduct forces them to prefer; do not pretend that the
distinctions which you make toward them are distinctions which are
made for the larger good of men, but simply confess in humility and
self-abasement that you are not able to live up to your Christian
vows; that you cannot treat these men as brothers and therefore you
are going to set them aside and let them go their half-tended way.

I should be sorry, I should be grieved more than I can say, to see
that which happened in the Southern Methodist Church and that which is
practically happening in the Presbyterian Church, and that which will
come in other sects--namely, a segregation of Negro Christians, come
to be true among Episcopalians. It would be a sign of Christian
disunity far more distressing than sectarianism. I should therefore
deplore it; and yet I am also free to say that unless this church is
prepared to treat its Negro members with exactly the same
consideration that other members receive, with the same brotherhood
and fellowship, the same encouragement to aspiration, the same
privileges, similarly trained priests and similar preferment for them,
then I should a great deal rather see them set aside than to see a
continuation of present injustice. All I ask is that when you do this
you do it with an open and honest statement of the real reasons and
not with statements veiled by any hypocritical excuses.

I am therefore above all desirous that the younger men and women who
are to-day taking up the leadership of this great group of men, who
wish the world better and work toward that end, should begin to see
the real significance of this step and of the great problem behind it.
It is not a problem simply of the South, not a problem simply of this
country, it is a problem of the world.

As I have said elsewhere: "Most men are colored. A belief in humanity
is above all a belief in colored men." If you cannot get on with
colored men in America you cannot get on with the modern world; and if
you cannot work with the humanity of this world how shall your souls
ever tune with the myriad sided souls of worlds to come?

It may be that the price of the black man's survival in America and in
the modern world, will be a long and shameful night of subjection to
caste and segregation. If so, he will pay it, doggedly, silently,
unfalteringly, for the sake of human liberty and the souls of his
children's children. But as he stoops he will remember the indignation
of that Jesus who cried, yonder behind heaving seas and years: "Woe
unto you scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, that strain out a gnat and
swallow a camel,"--as if God cared a whit whether His Sons are born of
maid, wife or widow so long as His church sits deaf to His own
calling:

"Ho! every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters and he that hath
no money; come ye, buy and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk without
money and without price!"

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Grimke: "Right on the Scaffold."

[2] "The Negro Church," Atlanta University Publications, No. 8.




       *       *       *       *       *

NOTES

TO CHAPTERS III AND IV

       *       *       *       *       *




NOTES TO CHAPTER III

NOTE 1


"The history of slavery and the slave trade after 1820 must be read in
the light of the industrial revolution through which the civilized
world passed in the first half of the nineteenth century. Between the
years 1775 and 1825 occurred economic events and changes of the
highest importance and widest influence. Though all branches of the
industry felt the impulse of this new industrial life, yet, if we
consider single industries, cotton manufacture has, during the
nineteenth century, made the most magnificent and gigantic advances."

This fact is easily explained by the remarkable series of inventions
that revolutionized this industry between 1738 and 1830, including
Arkwright's, Watt's, Compton's, and Cartwright's epoch making
contrivances. The effect which these inventions had on the manufacture
of cotton goods is best illustrated by the fact that in England, the
chief cotton market of the world, the consumption of raw cotton rose
steadily from 13,000 bales in 1781, to 572,000 in 1820, to 871,000 in
1830, and to 3,366,000 in 1860. Very early, therefore, came the query
whence the supply of raw cotton was to come. Tentative experiments on
the rich, broad fields of the Southern United States, together with
the indispensable invention of Whitney's cotton gin, soon answered
this question. A new economic future was opened up to this land, and
immediately the whole South began to extend its cotton culture, and
more and more to throw its whole energy into this one staple.

Here it was that the fatal mistake of compromising with slavery in the
beginning, and of the policy of _laissez-faire_ pursued thereafter,
became painfully manifest; for, instead now of a healthy, normal,
economic development along proper industrial lines, we have the
abnormal and fatal rise of a slave-labor, large-farming system, which,
before it was realized, had so intertwined itself with and braced
itself upon the economic forces of an industrial age, that a vast and
terrible civil war was necessary to displace it. The tendencies to a
patriarchal serfdom, recognized in the age of Washington and
Jefferson, began slowly but surely to disappear; and in the second
quarter of the century Southern slavery was irresistibly changing from
a family institution to an industrial system.

DuBois, "Suppression of the Slave Trade," p. 151.

A list of the chief inventions most graphically illustrates the
above:--

  1738, John Jay, fly shuttle.
        John Wyatt, spinning by rollers.
  1748, Lewis Paul, carding machine.
  1760, Robert Kay, drop box.
  1769, Richard Arkwright, water-frame and throstle.
        James Watt, steam-engine.
  1772, James Lees, improvements on carding-machine.
  1775, Richard Arkwright, series of combinations.
  1779, Samuel Compton, mule.
  1785, Edmund Cartwright, power-loom.
  1803-4, Radcliffe and Johnson, dressing-machine.
  1817, Roberts, fly-frame.
  1818, William Eaton, self-acting frame.
  1825-30, Roberts, improvements on mule.

Cf. Baines, "History of the Cotton Manufactures," pp. 116-23;
"EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica," 9th ed., article "Cotton."


NOTE 2

In 1832, Alabama declared that "any person or persons who shall
attempt to teach any free person of color or slave to spell, read, or
write, shall, upon conviction thereof by indictment, be fined in a
sum not less than $250, nor more than $500."

Georgia, in 1770, fined any person who taught a slave to read or write
twenty pounds. In 1829 the State enacted:

"If any slave, Negro or free person of color, or any white person,
shall teach any other slave, Negro or free person of color to read or
write, either written or printed characters, the same free person of
color or slave shall be punished by fine and whipping, or fine or
whipping, at the discretion of the court; and if a white person so
offend, he, she or they shall be punished with a fine not exceeding
$500 and imprisonment in the common jail at the discretion of the
court."

In 1833 this law was put into the penal code, with additional
penalties for using slaves in printing offices to set type. These laws
were violated sometimes by individual masters, and clandestine schools
were opened for Negroes in some of the cities before the war. In 1850
and thereafter there was some agitation to repeal these laws and a
bill to that effect failed in the Senate of Georgia by two or three
votes.

Louisiana, in 1830, declared that "All persons who shall teach or
permit or cause to be taught any slave to read or write shall be
imprisoned not less than one month nor more than twelve months."

Missouri, in 1847, passed an act saying that "No person shall keep or
teach any school for the instruction of Negroes or mulattoes in
reading or writing in this state."

North Carolina had schools supported by free Negroes up until 1835,
when they were abolished by law.

South Carolina, in 1740, declared: "Whereas, the having of slaves
taught to write or suffering them to be employed in writing may be
attended with inconveniences, be it enacted, that all and every person
and persons whatsoever who shall hereafter teach or cause any slave
or slaves to be taught, or shall use or employ any slave as a scribe
in any manner of writing whatever, hereafter taught to write, every
such person or persons shall for every such offense forfeit the sum of
Â£100 current money."

In 1800 and 1833 the teaching of free Negroes was restricted: "And if
any free person of color or slave shall keep any school or other
places of instruction for teaching any slave or free person of color
to read or write, such free person of color or slave shall be liable
to the same fine, imprisonment and corporal punishment as by this act
are imposed and inflicted on free persons of color and slaves for
teaching slaves to write." Other sections prohibited white persons
from teaching slaves. Apparently whites might teach free Negroes to
some extent.

Virginia, in 1819, forbade "all meetings or assemblages of slaves or
free Negroes or mulattoes mixing and associating with such slaves,
... at any school or schools for teaching them reading and writing,
either in the day or night." Nevertheless free Negroes kept schools
for themselves until the Nat Turner Insurrection, when it was enacted,
1831, that "all meetings of free Negroes or mulattoes at any
school-house, church, meeting-house or other place, for teaching them
reading and writing, either in the day or night, under whatsoever
pretext, shall be deemed and considered an unlawful assembly." This
law was carefully enforced.

In the Northern States few actual prohibitory laws were enacted, but
in Connecticut, New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio and elsewhere, mob
violence frequently arose against Negro schools, and in Connecticut
the teaching of Negroes was restricted as follows in 1833: "No person
shall set up or establish in this state any school, academy or other
literary institution for the instruction or education of colored
persons who are not inhabitants of this State, or harbor or board,
for the purpose of attending or being taught or instructed in any such
school, academy or literary institution any colored person who is not
an inhabitant of any town in this State, without the consent, in
writing, first obtained, of a majority of the civil authority, and
also of the select-men of the town in which each school, academy or
literary institution is situated." This was especially directed
against the famous Prudence Crandall school, and was repeated in 1838.

Ohio decreed, in 1829, that "the attendance of black or mulatto
persons be specifically prohibited, but all taxes assessed upon the
property of colored persons for school purposes should be appropriated
to their instruction and no other purpose." This prohibition was
enforced, but the second clause was a dead letter for twenty years.
Cf. Atlanta University Publications, No. 6.


NOTE 3

Cf. Cairnes' "Slave Power."


NOTE 4

Stephen A. Douglas said "that there was not the shadow of doubt that
the slave-trade had been carried on quite extensively for a long time
back, and that there had been more slaves imported into the Southern
States, during the last year, than had ever been imported before in
any one year, even when the slave-trade was legal. It was his
confident belief, that over fifteen thousand slaves had been brought
into this country during the past year (1859). He had seen, with his
own eyes, three hundred of those recently-imported, miserable beings,
in a slave-pen in Vicksburg, Miss., and also large numbers at Memphis,
Tenn." It was currently reported that depots for these slaves existed
in over twenty large cities and towns in the South, and an interested
person boasted to a senator, about 1860, that "twelve vessels would
discharge their living freight upon our shores within ninety days from
the 1st of June last," and that between sixty and seventy cargoes had
been successfully introduced in the last eighteen months. (Cf. DuBois:
"Slave Trade," ch. xi.)


NOTE 5

Cf. Olmsted's "Journeys" and Helper's "Impending Crisis."


NOTE 6

Has not the time come for characterizing war plainly and ceasing to
envelope it in a haze of sentimental lies? We have near worshiped the
Civil War for a generation, when in truth it was a disgrace to
civilization and we know it.


NOTE 7

Cf. Blaine: "Twenty Years in Congress"; "American Political Science
Review," Vol. 1, pp. 44-61; _e.g._, "South Carolina, besides thus
minutely regulating the labor of Negroes under contract, prohibited
them from practicing the 'art, trade or business of an artisan,
mechanic, or shopkeeper,' or any other trade or business on their own
account without paying an annual license fee to the district judge.
And no Negro could obtain a license who had not served a term of
'apprenticeship' at the trade. Tennessee also required licenses; and
Mississippi required Negroes to have written evidence of their home
and employment. Mississippi also prohibited the renting or leasing of
any land to Negroes, except in incorporated towns and cities."
Louisiana had perhaps the most outrageous provisions.


NOTE 8

Albion W. Tourgee said: "They instituted a public school system in a
region where public schools had been unknown. They opened the
ballot-box and the jury-box to thousands of white men who had been
debarred from them by a lack of earthly possessions. They introduced
home rule in the South. They abolished the whipping-post, the
branding-iron, the stocks and other barbarous forms of punishment
which had up to that time prevailed. They reduced capital felonies
from about twenty to two or three. In an age of extravagance they were
extravagant in the sums appropriated for public works. In all that
time no man's rights of person were invaded under the forms of law."
Thomas E. Miller, a Negro member of the late Constitutional Convention
of South Carolina, said: "The gentleman from Edgefield (Mr. Tillman)
speaks of the piling of the State debt; of jobbery and peculation
during the period between 1869 and 1873 in South Carolina, but he has
not found voice eloquent enough nor pen exact enough to mention those
imperishable gifts bestowed upon South Carolina between 1873 and 1876
by Negro legislators--the laws relative to finance, the building of
penal and charitable institutions, and, greatest of all, the
establishment of the public school system. Starting as infants in
legislation in 1869, many wise measures were not thought of, many
injudicious acts were passed. But in the administration of affairs for
the next four years, having learned by experience the result of bad
acts, we immediately passed reformatory laws touching every department
of state, county, municipal and town governments. These enactments are
to-day upon the statute books of South Carolina. They stand as living
witnesses of the Negro's fitness to vote and legislate upon the rights
of mankind."

Cf. Love's "Disfranchisement of the Negro," p. 10.


NOTE 9

Cf. "The Economic Future of the Negro," in papers and proceedings of
the eighteenth Annual Meeting, American Economic Association, pp.
219-42.


NOTE 10

See Alabama Laws on Labor Contracts.


NOTE 11

See Laws of Alabama, 1906-1907.


NOTE 12

See Laws of South Carolina, 1906-1907.


NOTE 13

Cf. Bulletin Number 8, 12th United States Census.


NOTE 14

This statement when made was challenged by a Virginia rector. Let John
Sharp Williams, minority leader of the House of Representatives answer
him.

"It is the physical presence of the Negro which constitutes the Negro
problem and the race issue. It is not the fact that the Negro can vote
in the South, because, as a matter of fact, he cannot and does not.
The Negro problem would be just as troublesome as it is to-day if the
fifteenth amendment were repealed. The fifteenth amendment touches it
only on its political or voting side, where the trouble is cured
already in the South. It is true that the Negro does vote in Ohio,
Illinois and New Jersey and various other places. But the people of
those states could to-morrow, if they wanted to, get rid of his vote,
just as we have got rid of it in Mississippi. The very fact that they
have not done it is proof of the fact that they do not want to do it,
and that very fact is the death-blow of the Vardaman agitation."

Negroes are disfranchised by legal and illegal methods and by unfair
administration of the law. The "white" primary is a wide-spread
subterfuge: to the democratic primary election all white men are
admitted without question, and no Negro under any circumstances. The
verdict of the primary is then registered in a farce "election." In
Atlanta, _e.g._, at the "election" 700 votes are cast in a city of
100,000! The success of the "white" primary depends of course (_a_) on
the illegal power of the party chiefs to exclude any votes they choose
on any pretext and (_b_) on the absolute and unfair control of
election machinery and returns by one party and (_c_) on public
acquiescence in this travesty on popular government.


NOTE 15

The Atlanta riot had two distinct phases: first, Saturday, the killing
of innocent and surprised Negroes by a white mob; then a lull when
blacks rapidly armed themselves; finally the attempt to renew the
assault by a crowd mingled with county policemen, who were repulsed by
a fierce defense by Negroes; these Negroes were afterward acquitted of
murder by a southern jury. The number of white and black killed in
that encounter will never be known, but it stopped the riot. Cf.
"World To-Day," Nov. 1906.


NOTE 16

The executive officials of the miners in Alabama consist of four
whites and four Negroes.


NOTE 17

Ten good references on the economic history of the Negro and slavery
are:

1. Kemble, Fanny, "A Journal of a Residence on a Georgia Plantation,"
N.Y., 1863. 337 pp. 12mo.

2. Olmsted, F.L., "A Journey in the Sea Board Slave States," N.Y.,
1856. 723 pp. 12mo.

3. Cairnes, J.E., "The Slave Power: Its Character, Career, and
Probable Designs," London, 1862. 304 pp., 2d ed. N.Y. 410 pp.

4. United States 12th Census, Bulletin No. 8: "Negroes in United
States," by W.F. Wilcox and W.E.B. DuBois, Wash., 1904, 333 pp.

5. "The Philadelphia Negro" (Publications of the University of
Pennsylvania) 520 pp. Ginn.

6. "The Suppression of the Slave Trade" (Harvard Historical
Monographs, No. 1) 335 pp. Longmans, 1896.

7. Atlanta University Publications:

No. 3, "Efforts for Social Betterment," 66 pp. 1898.

No. 4, "The Negro in Business," 77 pp. 1899.

No. 7, "The Negro Artisan," 192 pp. 1902.

8. Bulletins of the United States Department of Labor.

Nos. 10, 14, 22, 32, 35, 37, 38, 48.

9. United States: Report of the Industrial Commission 1901-2, 19 vols.

10. Proceedings of the American Economic Association, 1906.




NOTES TO CHAPTER IV


NOTE 18

See Atlanta University Publications, No. 8, Section 4.


NOTE 19

"Baptism doth not alter the condition of the person as to his bondage
or freedom, in order that diverse masters freed from this doubt may
more carefully endeavor the propagation of Christianity." (Williams I,
139.)


NOTE 20

Cf. Dr. Albert Bushnell Hart, "The Realities of Negro Suffrage,"
Proceedings of the American Political Science Association, Vol. II,
1905.


NOTE 21

The Church of England through the "Society for the Propagation of the
Gospel" (incorporated 1701) sent several missionaries who worked
chiefly in the North. The history of the society goes on to say: "It
is a matter of commendation to the clergy that they have done thus
much in so great and difficult a work. But, alas! what is the
instruction of a few hundreds in several years with respect to the
many thousands uninstructed, unconverted, living, dying, utter pagans.
It must be confessed what hath been done is as nothing with regard to
what a true Christian would hope to see effected." After stating
several difficulties in respect to the religious instruction of the
Negroes, it is said: "But the greatest obstruction is the masters
themselves do not consider enough the obligation which lies upon them
to have their slaves instructed." The work of this society in America
ceased in 1783. The Methodists report the following members:

  1786                 1,890
  1790                11,682
  1791                12,884
  1796                12,215

Nearly all were in the North and the border states. Georgia had only
148. The Baptists had 18,000 Negro members in 1793. As to the
Episcopalians, the single state of Virginia where more was done than
elsewhere will illustrate the result:

"The Church Commission for Work among the Colored People at a late
meeting decided to request the various rectors of parishes throughout
the South to institute Sunday-schools and special services for the
colored population 'such as were frequently found in the South before
the war.' The commission hope for 'real advance' among the colored
people in so doing. We do not agree with the commission with respect
to either the wisdom or the efficiency of the plan suggested. In the
first place, this 'before the war' plan was a complete failure so far
as church extension was concerned, in the past when white churchmen
had complete bodily control of their slaves....

"The Journals of Virginia will verify the contention, that during the
'before the war' period, while the bishops and a large number of the
clergy were always interested in the religious training of the slaves,
yet as a matter of fact there was general apathy and indifference upon
the part of the laity with respect to this matter.

"At various intervals resolutions were presented in the Annual
Conventions with the avowed purpose of stimulating an interest in the
religious welfare of the slaves. But despite all these efforts the
Journals fail to record any great achievements along that line.... So
faithful had been the work under such conditions that as late as 1879
there were less than 200 colored communicants reported in the whole
state of Virginia." (_Church Advocate._)


NOTE 22

Charles C. Jones: "The Religious Instruction of the Negroes in the
United States," Savannah, 1842. Cf. Atlanta University Publication,
No. 8, passim.


NOTE 23

Cf. Hart, _supra._ Note too the decrease in the proportion of free
Negroes.


NOTE 24

Note Dr. Cartwright's articles; DeBow's "Review," Vol. II, pp. 29,
184, 331 and 504. Cf. Fitzhugh, "Cannibals All."


NOTE 25

Cf. Weeks, "Southern Quakers and Slavery," Balt. 1896; Ballagh,
"Slavery in Virginia."


NOTE 26

There has been in the North a generously conceived campaign in the
last ten years to emphasize the good in the South and minimize the
evil. Consequently many people have come to believe that men like
Fleming and Murphy represent either the dominant Southern sentiment
or that of a strong minority. On the contrary the brave utterances of
such men represent a very small and very weak minority--a minority
which is growing very slowly and which can only hope for success by
means of moral support from the outside. Such moral support has not
been generally given; it is Tillman, Vardaman and Dixon who get the
largest hearing in the land and they represent the dominant public
opinion in the South. The mass of public opinion there while it
hesitates at the extreme brutality of these spokesmen is nearer to
them than to Bassett or Fleming or Alderman.


NOTE 27

Cf. "The Negro Church," Atlanta University Publication, No. 8. 212 pp.
1903.


NOTE 28

Twenty good references on the ethical and religious aspect of slavery
and the Negro problem are:

C.C. Jones, "The Religious Instruction of the Negroes in the United
States," Savannah, 1842. 277 pp. 12mo.

R.F. Campbell, "Some Aspects of the Race Problem in the South,"
Pamphlet, 1899. Asheville, N.C. 31 pp. 8vo.

R.L. Dabney, "Defence of Virginia, and Through Her of the South," New
York, 1867. 356 pp. 12mo.

Nehemiah Adams, "A South Side View of Slavery," Boston, 1854. viii,
7-214 pp. 16mo.

Richard Allen, First Bishop of the A.M.E. Church. "The life,
experience and gospel labors of the Rt. Rev. Richard Allen." Written
by himself. Phila., 1793. 69 pp. 8vo.

Matthew Anderson, "Presbyterianism and Its Relation to the Negro,"
Phila., 1897.

Geo. S. Merriam, "The Negro and the Nation," N.Y., 1906. 436 pp.
12mo.

M.S. Locke, "Anti-Slavery in America," 255 pp. 1901.

W.A. Sinclair, "The Aftermath of Slavery," etc., with an introduction
by T.W. Higginson, Boston, 1905. 358 pp.

N.S. Shaler, "The Neighbor: The Natural History of Human Contrasts"
(The problem of the African), Boston, 1904. vii, 342 pp. 12mo.

Atlanta University Publications:

    Number 6, "The Negro Common School," 120 pp. 1901.

    Number 8, "The Negro Church," 212 pp. 1903.

    Number 9, "Notes on Negro Crime," 76 pp. 1904.

E.H. Abbott, "Religious life in America," A record of personal
observation. N.Y.: _The Outlook_, 1902. xii, 730 pp. 8vo.

W.E.B. DuBois, "The Souls of Black Folk," Chicago, 1903.

Friends, "A Brief Testimony of the Progress of the Friends Against
Slavery and the Slave-Trade," 1671-1787. Phila., 1843.

J.W. Hood, "One Hundred Years of the A.M.E. Zion Church."

S.M. Janney, "History of the Religious Society of Friends," Phila.,
1859-1867.

D.A. Payne, "History of the A.M.E. Church," Nashville, 1891.

S.B. Weeks, "Anti-Slavery Sentiment in the South," Washington, D.C.,
1898. "Southern Quakers and Slavery," Baltimore, 1896.

White, "The African Preacher."Title: The Conservation of Races
       The American Negro Academy. Occasional Papers No. 2

Author: W. E. Burghardt Du Bois

Release Date: February 11, 2010 
  The American Negro Academy

  Occasional Papers, No. 2.


  The Conservation of Races.

  BY
  W. E. BURGHARDT Du BOIS.


  WASHINGTON, D. C.
  Published by the Academy.
  1897.



  Baptist Magazine Print,
  Washington, D. C.

  Orders may be sent to John H. Wills.
  The Boston Cheap Book Store,
  Washington, D. C.




Announcement


The American Negro Academy believes that upon those of the race who have
had the advantages of higher education and culture, rests the
responsibility of taking concerted steps for the employment of these
agencies to uplift the race to higher planes of thought and action.

Two great obstacles to this consummation are apparent: (_a_) The lack of
unity, want of harmony, absence of a self-sacrificing spirit, and no
well-defined line of policy seeking definite aims; and (_b_) The
persistent, relentless, at times covert opposition employed to thwart
the Negro at every step of his upward struggles to establish the
justness of his claim to the highest physical, intellectual and moral
possibilities.

The Academy will, therefore, from time to time, publish such papers as
in their judgment aid, by their broad and scholarly treatment of the
topics discussed the dissemination of principles tending to the growth
and development of the Negro along right lines, and the vindication of
that race against vicious assaults.




THE CONSERVATION OF RACES.


The American Negro has always felt an intense personal interest in
discussions as to the origins and destinies of races: primarily because
back of most discussions of race with which he is familiar, have lurked
certain assumptions as to his natural abilities, as to his political,
intellectual and moral status, which he felt were wrong. He has,
consequently, been led to deprecate and minimize race distinctions, to
believe intensely that out of one blood God created all nations, and to
speak of human brotherhood as though it were the possibility of an
already dawning to-morrow.

Nevertheless, in our calmer moments we must acknowledge that human
beings are divided into races; that in this country the two most extreme
types of the world's races have met, and the resulting problem as to the
future relations of these types is not only of intense and living
interest to us, but forms an epoch in the history of mankind.

It is necessary, therefore, in planning our movements, in guiding our
future development, that at times we rise above the pressing, but
smaller questions of separate schools and cars, wage-discrimination and
lynch law, to survey the whole question of race in human philosophy and
to lay, on a basis of broad knowledge and careful insight, those large
lines of policy and higher ideals which may form our guiding lines and
boundaries in the practical difficulties of every day. For it is certain
that all human striving must recognize the hard limits of natural law,
and that any striving, no matter how intense and earnest, which is
against the constitution of the world, is vain. The question, then,
which we must seriously consider is this: What is the real meaning of
Race; what has, in the past, been the law of race development, and what
lessons has the past history of race development to teach the rising
Negro people?

When we thus come to inquire into the essential difference of races we
find it hard to come at once to any definite conclusion. Many criteria
of race differences have in the past been proposed, as color, hair,
cranial measurements and language. And manifestly, in each of these
respects, human beings differ widely. They vary in color, for instance,
from the marble-like pallor of the Scandinavian to the rich, dark brown
of the Zulu, passing by the creamy Slav, the yellow Chinese, the light
brown Sicilian and the brown Egyptian. Men vary, too, in the texture of
hair from the obstinately straight hair of the Chinese to the
obstinately tufted and frizzled hair of the Bushman. In measurement of
heads, again, men vary; from the broad-headed Tartar to the
medium-headed European and the narrow-headed Hottentot; or, again in
language, from the highly-inflected Roman tongue to the monosyllabic
Chinese. All these physical characteristics are patent enough, and if
they agreed with each other it would be very easy to classify mankind.
Unfortunately for scientists, however, these criteria of race are most
exasperatingly intermingled. Color does not agree with texture of hair,
for many of the dark races have straight hair; nor does color agree with
the breadth of the head, for the yellow Tartar has a broader head than
the German; nor, again, has the science of language as yet succeeded in
clearing up the relative authority of these various and contradictory
criteria. The final word of science, so far, is that we have at least
two, perhaps three, great families of human beings--the whites and
Negroes, possibly the yellow race. That other races have arisen from the
intermingling of the blood of these two. This broad division of the
world's races which men like Huxley and Raetzel have introduced as more
nearly true than the old five-race scheme of Blumenbach, is nothing more
than an acknowledgment that, so far as purely physical characteristics
are concerned, the differences between men do not explain all the
differences of their history. It declares, as Darwin himself said, that
great as is the physical unlikeness of the various races of men their
likenesses are greater, and upon this rests the whole scientific
doctrine of Human Brotherhood.

Although the wonderful developments of human history teach that the
grosser physical differences of color, hair and bone go but a short way
toward explaining the different roles which groups of men have played
in Human Progress, yet there are differences--subtle, delicate and
elusive, though they may be--which have silently but definitely
separated men into groups. While these subtle forces have generally
followed the natural cleavage of common blood, descent and physical
peculiarities, they have at other times swept across and ignored these.
At all times, however, they have divided human beings into races, which,
while they perhaps transcend scientific definition, nevertheless, are
clearly defined to the eye of the Historian and Sociologist.

If this be true, then the history of the world is the history, not of
individuals, but of groups, not of nations, but of races, and he who
ignores or seeks to override the race idea in human history ignores and
overrides the central thought of all history. What, then, is a race? It
is a vast family of human beings, generally of common blood and
language, always of common history, traditions and impulses, who are
both voluntarily and involuntarily striving together for the
accomplishment of certain more or less vividly conceived ideals of life.

Turning to real history, there can be no doubt, first, as to the
widespread, nay, universal, prevalence of the race idea, the race
spirit, the race ideal, and as to its efficiency as the vastest and most
ingenious invention for human progress. We, who have been reared and
trained under the individualistic philosophy of the Declaration of
Independence and the laisser-faire philosophy of Adam Smith, are loath
to see and loath to acknowledge this patent fact of human history. We
see the Pharaohs, Caesars, Toussaints and Napoleons of history and
forget the vast races of which they were but epitomized expressions. We
are apt to think in our American impatience, that while it may have been
true in the past that closed race groups made history, that here in
conglomerate America _nous avons changer tout cela_--we have changed all
that, and have no need of this ancient instrument of progress. This
assumption of which the Negro people are especially fond, can not be
established by a careful consideration of history.

We find upon the world's stage today eight distinctly differentiated
races, in the sense in which History tells us the word must be used.
They are, the Slavs of eastern Europe, the Teutons of middle Europe, the
English of Great Britain and America, the Romance nations of Southern
and Western Europe, the Negroes of Africa and America, the Semitic
people of Western Asia and Northern Africa, the Hindoos of Central Asia
and the Mongolians of Eastern Asia. There are, of course, other minor
race groups, as the American Indians, the Esquimaux and the South Sea
Islanders; these larger races, too, are far from homogeneous; the Slav
includes the Czech, the Magyar, the Pole and the Russian; the Teuton
includes the German, the Scandinavian and the Dutch; the English include
the Scotch, the Irish and the conglomerate American. Under Romance
nations the widely-differing Frenchman, Italian, Sicilian and Spaniard
are comprehended. The term Negro is, perhaps, the most indefinite of
all, combining the Mulattoes and Zamboes of America and the Egyptians,
Bantus and Bushmen of Africa. Among the Hindoos are traces of widely
differing nations, while the great Chinese, Tartar, Corean and Japanese
families fall under the one designation--Mongolian.

The question now is: What is the real distinction between these nations?
Is it the physical differences of blood, color and cranial measurements?
Certainly we must all acknowledge that physical differences play a great
part, and that, with wide exceptions and qualifications, these eight
great races of to-day follow the cleavage of physical race distinctions;
the English and Teuton represent the white variety of mankind; the
Mongolian, the yellow; the Negroes, the black. Between these are many
crosses and mixtures, where Mongolian and Teuton have blended into the
Slav, and other mixtures have produced the Romance nations and the
Semites. But while race differences have followed mainly physical race
lines, yet no mere physical distinctions would really define or explain
the deeper differences--the cohesiveness and continuity of these groups.
The deeper differences are spiritual, psychical, differences--undoubtedly
based on the physical, but infinitely transcending them. The forces that
bind together the Teuton nations are, then, first, their race identity
and common blood; secondly, and more important, a common history, common
laws and religion, similar habits of thought and a conscious striving
together for certain ideals of life. The whole process which has brought
about these race differentiations has been a growth, and the great
characteristic of this growth has been the differentiation of spiritual
and mental differences between great races of mankind and the
integration of physical differences.

The age of nomadic tribes of closely related individuals represents the
maximum of physical differences. They were practically vast families,
and there were as many groups as families. As the families came together
to form cities the physical differences lessened, purity of blood was
replaced by the requirement of domicile, and all who lived within the
city bounds became gradually to be regarded as members of the group;
_i. e._, there was a slight and slow breaking down of physical barriers.
This, however, was accompanied by an increase of the spiritual and
social differences between cities. This city became husbandmen, this,
merchants, another warriors, and so on. The _ideals of life_ for which
the different cities struggled were different. When at last cities began
to coalesce into nations there was another breaking down of barriers
which separated groups of men. The larger and broader differences of
color, hair and physical proportions were not by any means ignored, but
myriads of minor differences disappeared, and the sociological and
historical races of men began to approximate the present division of
races as indicated by physical researches. At the same time the
spiritual and physical differences of race groups which constituted the
nations became deep and decisive. The English nation stood for
constitutional liberty and commercial freedom; the German nation for
science and philosophy; the Romance nations stood for literature and
art, and the other race groups are striving, each in its own way, to
develope for civilization its particular message, its particular ideal,
which shall help to guide the world nearer and nearer that perfection of
human life for which we all long, that

  "one far off Divine event."

This has been the function of race differences up to the present time.
What shall be its function in the future? Manifestly some of the great
races of today--particularly the Negro race--have not as yet given to
civilization the full spiritual message which they are capable of
giving. I will not say that the Negro race has as yet given no message
to the world, for it is still a mooted question among scientists as to
just how far Egyptian civilization was Negro in its origin; if it was
not wholly Negro, it was certainly very closely allied. Be that as it
may, however the fact still remains that the full, complete Negro
message of the whole Negro race has not as yet been given to the world:
that the messages and ideal of the yellow race have not been completed,
and that the striving of the mighty Slavs has but begun. The question
is, then: How shall this message be delivered; how shall these various
ideals be realized? The answer is plain: By the development of these
race groups, not as individuals, but as races. For the development of
Japanese genius, Japanese literature and art, Japanese spirit, only
Japanese, bound and welded together, Japanese inspired by one vast
ideal, can work out in its fullness the wonderful message which Japan
has for the nations of the earth. For the development of Negro genius,
of Negro literature and art, of Negro spirit, only Negroes bound and
welded together, Negroes inspired by one vast ideal, can work out in its
fullness the great message we have for humanity. We cannot reverse
history; we are subject to the same natural laws as other races, and if
the Negro is ever to be a factor in the world's history--if among the
gaily-colored banners that deck the broad ramparts of civilization is to
hang one uncompromising black, then it must be placed there by black
hands, fashioned by black heads and hallowed by the travail of
200,000,000 black hearts beating in one glad song of jubilee.

For this reason, the advance guard of the Negro people--the 8,000,000
people of Negro blood in the United States of America--must soon come to
realize that if they are to take their just place in the van of
Pan-Negroism, then their destiny is _not_ absorption by the white
Americans. That if in America it is to be proven for the first time in
the modern world that not only Negroes are capable of evolving
individual men like Toussaint, the Saviour, but are a nation stored with
wonderful possibilities of culture, then their destiny is not a servile
imitation of Anglo-Saxon culture, but a stalwart originality which shall
unswervingly follow Negro ideals.

It may, however, be objected here that the situation of our race in
America renders this attitude impossible; that our sole hope of
salvation lies in our being able to lose our race identity in the
commingled blood of the nation; and that any other course would merely
increase the friction of races which we call race prejudice, and against
which we have so long and so earnestly fought.

Here, then, is the dilemma, and it is a puzzling one, I admit. No Negro
who has given earnest thought to the situation of his people in America
has failed, at some time in life, to find himself at these cross-roads;
has failed to ask himself at some time: What, after all, am I? Am I an
American or am I a Negro? Can I be both? Or is it my duty to cease to be
a Negro as soon as possible and be an American? If I strive as a Negro,
am I not perpetuating the very cleft that threatens and separates Black
and White America? Is not my only possible practical aim the subduction
of all that is Negro in me to the American? Does my black blood place
upon me any more obligation to assert my nationality than German, or
Irish or Italian blood would?

It is such incessant self-questioning and the hesitation that arises
from it, that is making the present period a time of vacillation and
contradiction for the American Negro; combined race action is stifled,
race responsibility is shirked, race enterprises languish, and the best
blood, the best talent, the best energy of the Negro people cannot be
marshalled to do the bidding of the race. They stand back to make room
for every rascal and demagogue who chooses to cloak his selfish deviltry
under the veil of race pride.

Is this right? Is it rational? Is it good policy? Have we in America a
distinct mission as a race--a distinct sphere of action and an
opportunity for race development, or is self-obliteration the highest
end to which Negro blood dare aspire?

If we carefully consider what race prejudice really is, we find it,
historically, to be nothing but the friction between different groups of
people; it is the difference in aim, in feeling, in ideals of two
different races; if, now, this difference exists touching territory,
laws, language, or even religion, it is manifest that these people
cannot live in the same territory without fatal collision; but if, on
the other hand, there is substantial agreement in laws, language and
religion; if there is a satisfactory adjustment of economic life, then
there is no reason why, in the same country and on the same street, two
or three great national ideals might not thrive and develop, that men of
different races might not strive together for their race ideals as well,
perhaps even better, than in isolation. Here, it seems to me, is the
reading of the riddle that puzzles so many of us. We are Americans, not
only by birth and by citizenship, but by our political ideals, our
language, our religion. Farther than that, our Americanism does not go.
At that point, we are Negroes, members of a vast historic race that from
the very dawn of creation has slept, but half awakening in the dark
forests of its African fatherland. We are the first fruits of this new
nation, the harbinger of that black to-morrow which is yet destined to
soften the whiteness of the Teutonic to-day. We are that people whose
subtle sense of song has given America its only American music, its only
American fairy tales, its only touch of pathos and humor amid its mad
money-getting plutocracy. As such, it is our duty to conserve our
physical powers, our intellectual endowments, our spiritual ideals; as a
race we must strive by race organization, by race solidarity, by race
unity to the realization of that broader humanity which freely
recognizes differences in men, but sternly deprecates inequality in
their opportunities of development.

For the accomplishment of these ends we need race organizations: Negro
colleges, Negro newspapers, Negro business organizations, a Negro school
of literature and art, and an intellectual clearing house, for all these
products of the Negro mind, which we may call a Negro Academy. Not only
is all this necessary for positive advance, it is absolutely imperative
for negative defense. Let us not deceive ourselves at our situation in
this country. Weighted with a heritage of moral iniquity from our past
history, hard pressed in the economic world by foreign immigrants and
native prejudice, hated here, despised there and pitied everywhere; our
one haven of refuge is ourselves, and but one means of advance, our own
belief in our great destiny, our own implicit trust in our ability and
worth. There is no power under God's high heaven that can stop the
advance of eight thousand thousand honest, earnest, inspired and united
people. But--and here is the rub--they _must_ be honest, fearlessly
criticising their own faults, zealously correcting them; they must be
_earnest_. No people that laughs at itself, and ridicules itself, and
wishes to God it was anything but itself ever wrote its name in history;
it _must_ be inspired with the Divine faith of our black mothers, that
out of the blood and dust of battle will march a victorious host, a
mighty nation, a peculiar people, to speak to the nations of earth a
Divine truth that shall make them free. And such a people must be
united; not merely united for the organized theft of political spoils,
not united to disgrace religion with whoremongers and ward-heelers; not
united merely to protest and pass resolutions, but united to stop the
ravages of consumption among the Negro people, united to keep black boys
from loafing, gambling and crime; united to guard the purity of black
women and to reduce that vast army of black prostitutes that is today
marching to hell; and united in serious organizations, to determine by
careful conference and thoughtful interchange of opinion the broad lines
of policy and action for the American Negro.

This is the reason for being which the American Negro Academy has. It
aims at once to be the epitome and expression of the intellect of the
black-blooded people of America, the exponent of the race ideals of one
of the world's great races. As such, the Academy must, if successful, be

  (_a_). Representative in character.

  (_b_). Impartial in conduct.

  (_c_). Firm in leadership.

It must be representative in character; not in that it represents all
interests or all factions, but in that it seeks to comprise something of
the _best_ thought, the most unselfish striving and the highest ideals.
There are scattered in forgotten nooks and corners throughout the land,
Negroes of some considerable training, of high minds, and high motives,
who are unknown to their fellows, who exert far too little influence.
These the Negro Academy should strive to bring into touch with each
other and to give them a common mouthpiece.

The Academy should be impartial in conduct; while it aims to exalt the
people it should aim to do so by truth--not by lies, by honesty--not by
flattery. It should continually impress the fact upon the Negro people
that they must not expect to have things done for them--they MUST DO FOR
THEMSELVES; that they have on their hands a vast work of self-reformation
to do, and that a little less complaint and whining, and a little more
dogged work and manly striving would do us more credit and benefit than a
thousand Force or Civil Rights bills.

Finally, the American Negro Academy must point out a practical path of
advance to the Negro people; there lie before every Negro today hundreds
of questions of policy and right which must be settled and which each
one settles now, not in accordance with any rule, but by impulse or
individual preference; for instance: What should be the attitude of
Negroes toward the educational qualification for voters? What should be
our attitude toward separate schools? How should we meet discriminations
on railways and in hotels? Such questions need not so much specific
answers for each part as a general expression of policy, and nobody
should be better fitted to announce such a policy than a representative
honest Negro Academy.

All this, however, must come in time after careful organization and long
conference. The immediate work before us should be practical and have
direct bearing upon the situation of the Negro. The historical work of
collecting the laws of the United States and of the various States of
the Union with regard to the Negro is a work of such magnitude and
importance that no body but one like this could think of undertaking it.
If we could accomplish that one task we would justify our existence.

In the field of Sociology an appalling work lies before us. First, we
must unflinchingly and bravely face the truth, not with apologies, but
with solemn earnestness. The Negro Academy ought to sound a note of
warning that would echo in every black cabin in the land: _Unless we
conquer our present vices they will conquer us_; we are diseased, we are
developing criminal tendencies, and an alarmingly large percentage of
our men and women are sexually impure. The Negro Academy should stand
and proclaim this over the housetops, crying with Garrison: _I will not
equivocate, I will not retreat a single inch, and I will be heard_. The
Academy should seek to gather about it the talented, unselfish men, the
pure and noble-minded women, to fight an army of devils that disgraces
our manhood and our womanhood. There does not stand today upon God's
earth a race more capable in muscle, in intellect, in morals, than the
American Negro, if he will bend his energies in the right direction; if
he will

      Burst his birth's invidious bar
  And grasp the skirts of happy chance,
  And breast the blows of circumstance,
      And grapple with his evil star.

In science and morals, I have indicated two fields of work for the
Academy. Finally, in practical policy, I wish to suggest the following
_Academy Creed_:

1. We believe that the Negro people, as a race, have a contribution to
make to civilization and humanity, which no other race can make.

2. We believe it the duty of the Americans of Negro descent, as a body,
to maintain their race identity until this mission of the Negro people
is accomplished, and the ideal of human brotherhood has become a
practical possibility.

3. We believe that, unless modern civilization is a failure, it is
entirely feasible and practicable for two races in such essential
political, economic and religious harmony as the white and colored
people of America, to develop side by side in peace and mutual
happiness, the peculiar contribution which each has to make to the
culture of their common country.

4. As a means to this end we advocate, not such social equality between
these races as would disregard human likes and dislikes, but such a
social equilibrium as would, throughout all the complicated relations of
life, give due and just consideration to culture, ability, and moral
worth, whether they be found under white or black skins.

5. We believe that the first and greatest step toward the settlement of
the present friction between the races--commonly called the Negro
Problem--lies in the correction of the immorality, crime and laziness
among the Negroes themselves, which still remains as a heritage from
slavery. We believe that only earnest and long continued efforts on our
own part can cure these social ills.

6. We believe that the second great step toward a better adjustment of
the relations between the races, should be a more impartial selection of
ability in the economic and intellectual world, and a greater respect
for personal liberty and worth, regardless of race. We believe that only
earnest efforts on the part of the white people of this country will
bring much needed reform in these matters.

7. On the basis of the foregoing declaration, and firmly believing in
our high destiny, we, as American Negroes, are resolved to strive in
every honorable way for the realization of the best and highest aims,
for the development of strong manhood and pure womanhood, and for the
rearing of a race ideal in America and Africa, to the glory of God and
the uplifting of the Negro people.            

THE QUEST OF THE SILVER FLEECE


                   TO ONE

whose name may not be written but to whose tireless
faith the shaping of these cruder thoughts to forms
     more fitly perfect is doubtless due, this
        finished work is herewith dedicated






_Note_

He who would tell a tale must look toward three ideals: to tell it well,
to tell it beautifully, and to tell the truth.

The first is the Gift of God, the second is the Vision of Genius, but
the third is the Reward of Honesty.

In _The Quest of the Silver Fleece_ there is little, I ween, divine or
ingenious; but, at least, I have been honest. In no fact or picture have
I consciously set down aught the counterpart of which I have not seen or
known; and whatever the finished picture may lack of completeness, this
lack is due now to the story-teller, now to the artist, but never to the
herald of the Truth.

NEW YORK CITY

_August 15, 1911_

THE AUTHOR




_One_

DREAMS


Night fell. The red waters of the swamp grew sinister and sullen. The
tall pines lost their slimness and stood in wide blurred blotches all
across the way, and a great shadowy bird arose, wheeled and melted,
murmuring, into the black-green sky.

The boy wearily dropped his heavy bundle and stood still, listening as
the voice of crickets split the shadows and made the silence audible. A
tear wandered down his brown cheek. They were at supper now, he
whispered--the father and old mother, away back yonder beyond the night.
They were far away; they would never be as near as once they had been,
for he had stepped into the world. And the cat and Old Billy--ah, but
the world was a lonely thing, so wide and tall and empty! And so bare,
so bitter bare! Somehow he had never dreamed of the world as lonely
before; he had fared forth to beckoning hands and luring, and to the
eager hum of human voices, as of some great, swelling music.

Yet now he was alone; the empty night was closing all about him here in
a strange land, and he was afraid. The bundle with his earthly treasure
had hung heavy and heavier on his shoulder; his little horde of money
was tightly wadded in his sock, and the school lay hidden somewhere far
away in the shadows. He wondered how far it was; he looked and harkened,
starting at his own heartbeats, and fearing more and more the long dark
fingers of the night.

Then of a sudden up from the darkness came music. It was human music,
but of a wildness and a weirdness that startled the boy as it fluttered
and danced across the dull red waters of the swamp. He hesitated, then
impelled by some strange power, left the highway and slipped into the
forest of the swamp, shrinking, yet following the song hungrily and half
forgetting his fear. A harsher, shriller note struck in as of many and
ruder voices; but above it flew the first sweet music, birdlike,
abandoned, and the boy crept closer.

The cabin crouched ragged and black at the edge of black waters. An old
chimney leaned drunkenly against it, raging with fire and smoke, while
through the chinks winked red gleams of warmth and wild cheer. With a
revel of shouting and noise, the music suddenly ceased. Hoarse staccato
cries and peals of laughter shook the old hut, and as the boy stood
there peering through the black trees, abruptly the door flew open and a
flood of light illumined the wood.

Amid this mighty halo, as on clouds of flame, a girl was dancing. She
was black, and lithe, and tall, and willowy. Her garments twined and
flew around the delicate moulding of her dark, young, half-naked limbs.
A heavy mass of hair clung motionless to her wide forehead. Her arms
twirled and flickered, and body and soul seemed quivering and whirring
in the poetry of her motion.

As she danced she sang. He heard her voice as before, fluttering like a
bird's in the full sweetness of her utter music. It was no tune nor
melody, it was just formless, boundless music. The boy forgot himself
and all the world besides. All his darkness was sudden light; dazzled he
crept forward, bewildered, fascinated, until with one last wild whirl
the elf-girl paused. The crimson light fell full upon the warm and
velvet bronze of her face--her midnight eyes were aglow, her full purple
lips apart, her half hid bosom panting, and all the music dead.
Involuntarily the boy gave a gasping cry and awoke to swamp and night
and fire, while a white face, drawn, red-eyed, peered outward from some
hidden throng within the cabin.

"Who's that?" a harsh voice cried.

"Where?" "Who is it?" and pale crowding faces blurred the light.

The boy wheeled blindly and fled in terror stumbling through the swamp,
hearing strange sounds and feeling stealthy creeping hands and arms and
whispering voices. On he toiled in mad haste, struggling toward the road
and losing it until finally beneath the shadows of a mighty oak he sank
exhausted. There he lay a while trembling and at last drifted into
dreamless sleep.

It was morning when he awoke and threw a startled glance upward to the
twisted branches of the oak that bent above, sifting down sunshine on
his brown face and close curled hair. Slowly he remembered the
loneliness, the fear and wild running through the dark. He laughed in
the bold courage of day and stretched himself.

Then suddenly he bethought him again of that vision of the night--the
waving arms and flying limbs of the girl, and her great black eyes
looking into the night and calling him. He could hear her now, and hear
that wondrous savage music. Had it been real? Had he dreamed? Or had it
been some witch-vision of the night, come to tempt and lure him to his
undoing? Where was that black and flaming cabin? Where was the girl--the
soul that had called him? _She_ must have been real; she had to live and
dance and sing; he must again look into the mystery of her great eyes.
And he sat up in sudden determination, and, lo! gazed straight into the
very eyes of his dreaming.

She sat not four feet from him, leaning against the great tree, her
eyes now languorously abstracted, now alert and quizzical with mischief.
She seemed but half-clothed, and her warm, dark flesh peeped furtively
through the rent gown; her thick, crisp hair was frowsy and rumpled, and
the long curves of her bare young arms gleamed in the morning sunshine,
glowing with vigor and life. A little mocking smile came and sat upon
her lips.

"What you run for?" she asked, with dancing mischief in her eyes.

"Because--" he hesitated, and his cheeks grew hot.

"I knows," she said, with impish glee, laughing low music.

"Why?" he challenged, sturdily.

"You was a-feared."

He bridled. "Well, I reckon you'd be a-feared if you was caught out in
the black dark all alone."

"Pooh!" she scoffed and hugged her knees. "Pooh! I've stayed out all
alone heaps o' nights."

He looked at her with a curious awe.

"I don't believe you," he asserted; but she tossed her head and her eyes
grew scornful.

"Who's a-feared of the dark? I love night." Her eyes grew soft.

He watched her silently, till, waking from her daydream, she abruptly
asked:

"Where you from?"

"Georgia."

"Where's that?"

He looked at her in surprise, but she seemed matter-of-fact.

"It's away over yonder," he answered.

"Behind where the sun comes up?"

"Oh, no!"

"Then it ain't so far," she declared. "I knows where the sun rises, and
I knows where it sets." She looked up at its gleaming splendor glinting
through the leaves, and, noting its height, announced abruptly:

"I'se hungry."

"So'm I," answered the boy, fumbling at his bundle; and then, timidly:
"Will you eat with me?"

"Yes," she said, and watched him with eager eyes.

Untying the strips of cloth, he opened his box, and disclosed chicken
and biscuits, ham and corn-bread. She clapped her hands in glee.

"Is there any water near?" he asked.

Without a word, she bounded up and flitted off like a brown bird,
gleaming dull-golden in the sun, glancing in and out among the trees,
till she paused above a tiny black pool, and then came tripping and
swaying back with hands held cupwise and dripping with cool water.

"Drink," she cried. Obediently he bent over the little hands that seemed
so soft and thin. He took a deep draught; and then to drain the last
drop, his hands touched hers and the shock of flesh first meeting flesh
startled them both, while the water rained through. A moment their eyes
looked deep into each other's--a timid, startled gleam in hers; a wonder
in his. Then she said dreamily:

"We'se known us all our lives, and--before, ain't we?"

He hesitated.

"Ye--es--I reckon," he slowly returned. And then, brightening, he asked
gayly: "And we'll be friends always, won't we?"

"Yes," she said at last, slowly and solemnly, and another brief moment
they stood still.

Then the mischief danced in her eyes, and a song bubbled on her lips.
She hopped to the tree.

"Come--eat!" she cried. And they nestled together amid the big black
roots of the oak, laughing and talking while they ate.

"What's over there?" he asked pointing northward.

"Cresswell's big house."

"And yonder to the west?"

"The school."

He started joyfully.

"The school! What school?"

"Old Miss' School."

"Miss Smith's school?"

"Yes." The tone was disdainful.

"Why, that's where I'm going. I was a-feared it was a long way off; I
must have passed it in the night."

"I hate it!" cried the girl, her lips tense.

"But I'll be so near," he explained. "And why do you hate it?"

"Yes--you'll be near," she admitted; "that'll be nice; but--" she
glanced westward, and the fierce look faded. Soft joy crept to her face
again, and she sat once more dreaming.

"Yon way's nicest," she said.

"Why, what's there?"

"The swamp," she said mysteriously.

"And what's beyond the swamp?"

She crouched beside him and whispered in eager, tense tones: "Dreams!"

He looked at her, puzzled.

"Dreams?" vaguely--"dreams? Why, dreams ain't--nothing."

"Oh, yes they is!" she insisted, her eyes flaming in misty radiance as
she sat staring beyond the shadows of the swamp. "Yes they is! There
ain't nothing but dreams--that is, nothing much.

"And over yonder behind the swamps is great fields full of dreams, piled
high and burning; and right amongst them the sun, when he's tired o'
night, whispers and drops red things, 'cept when devils make 'em black."

The boy stared at her; he knew not whether to jeer or wonder.

"How you know?" he asked at last, skeptically.

"Promise you won't tell?"

"Yes," he answered.

She cuddled into a little heap, nursing her knees, and answered slowly.

"I goes there sometimes. I creeps in 'mongst the dreams; they hangs
there like big flowers, dripping dew and sugar and blood--red, red
blood. And there's little fairies there that hop about and sing, and
devils--great, ugly devils that grabs at you and roasts and eats you if
they gits you; but they don't git me. Some devils is big and white, like
ha'nts; some is long and shiny, like creepy, slippery snakes; and some
is little and broad and black, and they yells--"

The boy was listening in incredulous curiosity, half minded to laugh,
half minded to edge away from the black-red radiance of yonder dusky
swamp. He glanced furtively backward, and his heart gave a great bound.

"Some is little and broad and black, and they yells--" chanted the girl.
And as she chanted, deep, harsh tones came booming through the forest:

"_Zo-ra! Zo-ra!_ O--o--oh, Zora!"

He saw far behind him, toward the shadows of the swamp, an old
woman--short, broad, black and wrinkled, with fangs and pendulous lips
and red, wicked eyes. His heart bounded in sudden fear; he wheeled
toward the girl, and caught only the uncertain flash of her
garments--the wood was silent, and he was alone.

He arose, startled, quickly gathered his bundle, and looked around him.
The sun was strong and high, the morning fresh and vigorous. Stamping
one foot angrily, he strode jauntily out of the wood toward the big
road.

But ever and anon he glanced curiously back. Had he seen a haunt? Or was
the elf-girl real? And then he thought of her words:

"We'se known us all our lives."




_Two_

THE SCHOOL


Day was breaking above the white buildings of the Negro school and
throwing long, low lines of gold in at Miss Sarah Smith's front window.
She lay in the stupor of her last morning nap, after a night of
harrowing worry. Then, even as she partially awoke, she lay still with
closed eyes, feeling the shadow of some great burden, yet daring not to
rouse herself and recall its exact form; slowly again she drifted toward
unconsciousness.

"_Bang! bang! bang!_" hard knuckles were beating upon the door below.

She heard drowsily, and dreamed that it was the nailing up of all her
doors; but she did not care much, and but feebly warded the blows away,
for she was very tired.

"_Bang! bang! bang!_" persisted the hard knuckles.

She started up, and her eye fell upon a letter lying on her bureau. Back
she sank with a sigh, and lay staring at the ceiling--a gaunt, flat,
sad-eyed creature, with wisps of gray hair half-covering her baldness,
and a face furrowed with care and gathering years.

It was thirty years ago this day, she recalled, since she first came to
this broad land of shade and shine in Alabama to teach black folks.

It had been a hard beginning with suspicion and squalor around; with
poverty within and without the first white walls of the new school home.
Yet somehow the struggle then with all its helplessness and
disappointment had not seemed so bitter as today: then failure meant but
little, now it seemed to mean everything; then it meant disappointment
to a score of ragged urchins, now it meant two hundred boys and girls,
the spirits of a thousand gone before and the hopes of thousands to
come. In her imagination the significance of these half dozen gleaming
buildings perched aloft seemed portentous--big with the destiny not
simply of a county and a State, but of a race--a nation--a world. It was
God's own cause, and yet--

"_Bang! bang! bang!_" again went the hard knuckles down there at the
front.

Miss Smith slowly arose, shivering a bit and wondering who could
possibly be rapping at that time in the morning. She sniffed the
chilling air and was sure she caught some lingering perfume from Mrs.
Vanderpool's gown. She had brought this rich and rare-apparelled lady up
here yesterday, because it was more private, and here she had poured
forth her needs. She had talked long and in deadly earnest. She had not
spoken of the endowment for which she had hoped so desperately during a
quarter of a century--no, only for the five thousand dollars to buy the
long needed new land. It was so little--so little beside what this woman
squandered--

The insistent knocking was repeated louder than before.

"Sakes alive," cried Miss Smith, throwing a shawl about her and leaning
out the window. "Who is it, and what do you want?"

"Please, ma'am. I've come to school," answered a tall black boy with a
bundle.

"Well, why don't you go to the office?" Then she saw his face and
hesitated. She felt again the old motherly instinct to be the first to
welcome the new pupil; a luxury which, in later years, the endless push
of details had denied her.

"Wait!" she cried shortly, and began to dress.

A new boy, she mused. Yes, every day they straggled in; every day came
the call for more, more--this great, growing thirst to know--to do--to
be. And yet that woman had sat right here, aloof, imperturbable,
listening only courteously. When Miss Smith finished, she had paused
and, flicking her glove,--

"My dear Miss Smith," she said softly, with a tone that just escaped a
drawl--"My dear Miss Smith, your work is interesting and your
faith--marvellous; but, frankly, I cannot make myself believe in it. You
are trying to treat these funny little monkeys just as you would your
own children--or even mine. It's quite heroic, of course, but it's sheer
madness, and I do not feel I ought to encourage it. I would not mind a
thousand or so to train a good cook for the Cresswells, or a clean and
faithful maid for myself--for Helene has faults--or indeed deft and
tractable laboring-folk for any one; but I'm quite through trying to
turn natural servants into masters of me and mine. I--hope I'm not too
blunt; I hope I make myself clear. You know, statistics show--"

"Drat statistics!" Miss Smith had flashed impatiently. "These are
folks."

Mrs. Vanderpool smiled indulgently. "To be sure," she murmured, "but
what sort of folks?"

"God's sort."

"Oh, well--"

But Miss Smith had the bit in her teeth and could not have stopped. She
was paying high for the privilege of talking, but it had to be said.

"God's sort, Mrs. Vanderpool--not the sort that think of the world as
arranged for their exclusive benefit and comfort."

"Well, I do want to count--"

Miss Smith bent forward--not a beautiful pose, but earnest.

"I want you to count, and I want to count, too; but I don't want us to
be the only ones that count. I want to live in a world where every soul
counts--white, black, and yellow--all. _That's_ what I'm teaching these
children here--to count, and not to be like dumb, driven cattle. If you
don't believe in this, of course you cannot help us."

"Your spirit is admirable, Miss Smith," she had said very softly; "I
only wish I could feel as you do. Good-afternoon," and she had rustled
gently down the narrow stairs, leaving an all but imperceptible
suggestion of perfume. Miss Smith could smell it yet as she went down
this morning.

The breakfast bell jangled. "Five thousand dollars," she kept repeating
to herself, greeting the teachers absently--"five thousand dollars." And
then on the porch she was suddenly aware of the awaiting boy. She eyed
him critically: black, fifteen, country-bred, strong, clear-eyed.

"Well?" she asked in that brusque manner wherewith her natural timidity
was wont to mask her kindness. "Well, sir?"

"I've come to school."

"Humph--we can't teach boys for nothing."

The boy straightened. "I can pay my way," he returned.

"You mean you can pay what we ask?"

"Why, yes. Ain't that all?"

"No. The rest is gathered from the crumbs of Dives' table."

Then he saw the twinkle in her eyes. She laid her hand gently upon his
shoulder.

"If you don't hurry you'll be late to breakfast," she said with an air
of confidence. "See those boys over there? Follow them, and at noon come
to the office--wait! What's your name?"

"Blessed Alwyn," he answered, and the passing teachers smiled.




_Three_

MISS MARY TAYLOR


Miss Mary Taylor did not take a college course for the purpose of
teaching Negroes. Not that she objected to Negroes as human
beings--quite the contrary. In the debate between the senior societies
her defence of the Fifteenth Amendment had been not only a notable bit
of reasoning, but delivered with real enthusiasm. Nevertheless, when the
end of the summer came and the only opening facing her was the teaching
of children at Miss Smith's experiment in the Alabama swamps, it must be
frankly confessed that Miss Taylor was disappointed.

Her dream had been a post-graduate course at Bryn Mawr; but that was out
of the question until money was earned. She had pictured herself earning
this by teaching one or two of her "specialties" in some private school
near New York or Boston, or even in a Western college. The South she had
not thought of seriously; and yet, knowing of its delightful
hospitality and mild climate, she was not averse to Charleston or New
Orleans. But from the offer that came to teach Negroes--country Negroes,
and little ones at that--she shrank, and, indeed, probably would have
refused it out of hand had it not been for her queer brother, John. John
Taylor, who had supported her through college, was interested in cotton.
Having certain schemes in mind, he had been struck by the fact that the
Smith School was in the midst of the Alabama cotton-belt.

"Better go," he had counselled, sententiously. "Might learn something
useful down there."

She had been not a little dismayed by the outlook, and had protested
against his blunt insistence.

"But, John, there's no society--just elementary work--"

John had met this objection with, "Humph!" as he left for his office.
Next day he had returned to the subject.

"Been looking up Tooms County. Find some Cresswells there--big
plantations--rated at two hundred and fifty thousand dollars. Some
others, too; big cotton county."

"You ought to know, John, if I teach Negroes I'll scarcely see much of
people in my own class."

"Nonsense! Butt in. Show off. Give 'em your Greek--and study Cotton. At
any rate, I say go."

And so, howsoever reluctantly, she had gone.

The trial was all she had anticipated, and possibly a bit more. She was
a pretty young woman of twenty-three, fair and rather daintily moulded.
In favorable surroundings, she would have been an aristocrat and an
epicure. Here she was teaching dirty children, and the smell of confused
odors and bodily perspiration was to her at times unbearable.

Then there was the fact of their color: it was a fact so insistent, so
fatal she almost said at times, that she could not escape it.
Theoretically she had always treated it with disdainful ease.

"What's the mere color of a human soul's skin," she had cried to a
Wellesley audience and the audience had applauded with enthusiasm. But
here in Alabama, brought closely and intimately in touch with these dark
skinned children, their color struck her at first with a sort of
terror--it seemed ominous and forbidding. She found herself shrinking
away and gripping herself lest they should perceive. She could not help
but think that in most other things they were as different from her as
in color. She groped for new ways to teach colored brains and marshal
colored thoughts and the result was puzzling both to teacher and
student. With the other teachers she had little commerce. They were in
no sense her sort of folk. Miss Smith represented the older New England
of her parents--honest, inscrutable, determined, with a conscience which
she worshipped, and utterly unselfish. She appealed to Miss Taylor's
ruddier and daintier vision but dimly and distantly as some memory of
the past. The other teachers were indistinct personalities, always very
busy and very tired, and talking "school-room" with their meals. Miss
Taylor was soon starving for human companionship, for the lighter
touches of life and some of its warmth and laughter. She wanted a glance
of the new books and periodicals and talk of great philanthropies and
reforms. She felt out of the world, shut in and mentally anÃ¦mic; great
as the "Negro Problem" might be as a world problem, it looked sordid and
small at close range. So for the hundredth time she was thinking today,
as she walked alone up the lane back of the barn, and then slowly down
through the bottoms. She paused a moment and nodded to the two boys at
work in a young cotton field.

"Cotton!"

She paused. She remembered with what interest she had always read of
this little thread of the world. She had almost forgotten that it was
here within touch and sight. For a moment something of the vision of
Cotton was mirrored in her mind. The glimmering sea of delicate leaves
whispered and murmured before her, stretching away to the Northward.
She remembered that beyond this little world it stretched on and on--how
far she did not know--but on and on in a great trembling sea, and the
foam of its mighty waters would one time flood the ends of the earth.

She glimpsed all this with parted lips, and then sighed impatiently.
There might be a bit of poetry here and there, but most of this place
was such desperate prose.

She glanced absently at the boys.

One was Bles Alwyn, a tall black lad. (Bles, she mused,--now who would
think of naming a boy "Blessed," save these incomprehensible creatures!)
Her regard shifted to the green stalks and leaves again, and she started
to move away. Then her New England conscience stepped in. She ought not
to pass these students without a word of encouragement or instruction.

"Cotton is a wonderful thing, is it not, boys?" she said rather primly.
The boys touched their hats and murmured something indistinctly. Miss
Taylor did not know much about cotton, but at least one more remark
seemed called for.

"How long before the stalks will be ready to cut?" she asked carelessly.
The farther boy coughed and Bles raised his eyes and looked at her; then
after a pause he answered slowly. (Oh! these people were so slow--now a
New England boy would have answered and asked a half-dozen questions in
the time.)

"I--I don't know," he faltered.

"Don't know! Well, of all things!" inwardly commented Miss
Taylor--"literally born in cotton, and--Oh, well," as much as to ask,
"What's the use?" She turned again to go.

"What is planted over there?" she asked, although she really didn't
care.

"Goobers," answered the smaller boy.

"Goobers?" uncomprehendingly.

"Peanuts," Bles specified.

"Oh!" murmured Miss Taylor. "I see there are none on the vines yet. I
suppose, though, it's too early for them."

Then came the explosion. The smaller boy just snorted with irrepressible
laughter and bolted across the fields. And Bles--was Miss Taylor
deceived?--or was he chuckling? She reddened, drew herself up, and then,
dropping her primness, rippled with laughter.

"What is the matter, Bles?" she asked.

He looked at her with twinkling eyes.

"Well, you see, Miss Taylor, it's like this: farming don't seem to be
your specialty."

The word was often on Miss Taylor's lips, and she recognized it. Despite
herself she smiled again.

"Of course, it isn't--I don't know anything about farming. But what did
I say so funny?"

Bles was now laughing outright.

"Why, Miss Taylor! I declare! Goobers don't grow on the tops of vines,
but underground on the roots--like yams."

"Is that so?"

"Yes, and we--we don't pick cotton stalks except for kindling."

"I must have been thinking of hemp. But tell me more about cotton."

His eyes lighted, for cotton was to him a very real and beautiful thing,
and a life-long companion, yet not one whose friendship had been
coarsened and killed by heavy toil. He leaned against his hoe and talked
half dreamily--where had he learned so well that dream-talk?

"We turn up the earth and sow it soon after Christmas. Then pretty soon
there comes a sort of greenness on the black land and it swells and
grows and, and--shivers. Then stalks shoot up with three or four leaves.
That's the way it is now, see? After that we chop out the weak stalks,
and the strong ones grow tall and dark, till I think it must be like the
ocean--all green and billowy; then come little flecks here and there
and the sea is all filled with flowers--flowers like little bells, blue
and purple and white."

"Ah! that must be beautiful," sighed Miss Taylor, wistfully, sinking to
the ground and clasping her hands about her knees.

"Yes, ma'am. But it's prettiest when the bolls come and swell and burst,
and the cotton covers the field like foam, all misty--"

She bent wondering over the pale plants. The poetry of the thing began
to sing within her, awakening her unpoetic imagination, and she
murmured:

"The Golden Fleece--it's the Silver Fleece!"

He harkened.

"What's that?" he asked.

"Have you never heard of the Golden Fleece, Bles?"

"No, ma'am," he said eagerly; then glancing up toward the Cresswell
fields, he saw two white men watching them. He grasped his hoe and
started briskly to work.

"Some time you'll tell me, please, won't you?"

She glanced at her watch in surprise and arose hastily.

"Yes, with pleasure," she said moving away--at first very fast, and then
more and more slowly up the lane, with a puzzled look on her face.

She began to realize that in this pleasant little chat the fact of the
boy's color had quite escaped her; and what especially puzzled her was
that this had not happened before. She had been here four months, and
yet every moment up to now she seemed to have been vividly, almost
painfully conscious, that she was a white woman talking to black folk.
Now, for one little half-hour she had been a woman talking to a boy--no,
not even that: she had been talking--just talking; there were no persons
in the conversation, just things--one thing: Cotton.

She started thinking of cotton--but at once she pulled herself back to
the other aspect. Always before she had been veiled from these folk: who
had put the veil there? Had she herself hung it before her soul, or had
they hidden timidly behind its other side? Or was it simply a brute
fact, regardless of both of them?

The longer she thought, the more bewildered she grew. There seemed no
analogy that she knew. Here was a unique thing, and she climbed to her
bedroom and stared at the stars.




_Four_

TOWN


John Taylor had written to his sister. He wanted information, very
definite information, about Tooms County cotton; about its stores, its
people--especially its people. He propounded a dozen questions, sharp,
searching questions, and he wanted the answers tomorrow. Impossible!
thought Miss Taylor. He had calculated on her getting this letter
yesterday, forgetting that their mail was fetched once a day from the
town, four miles away. Then, too, she did not know all these matters and
knew no one who did. Did John think she had nothing else to do? And
sighing at the thought of to-morrow's drudgery, she determined to
consult Miss Smith in the morning.

Miss Smith suggested a drive to town--Bles could take her in the
top-buggy after school--and she could consult some of the merchants and
business men. She could then write her letter and mail it there; it
would be but a day or so late getting to New York.

"Of course," said Miss Smith drily, slowly folding her napkin, "of
course, the only people here are the Cresswells."

"Oh, yes," said Miss Taylor invitingly. There was an allurement about
this all-pervasive name; it held her by a growing fascination and she
was anxious for the older woman to amplify. Miss Smith, however,
remained provokingly silent, so Miss Taylor essayed further.

"What sort of people are the Cresswells?" she asked.

"The old man's a fool; the young one a rascal; the girl a ninny," was
Miss Smith's succinct and acid classification of the county's first
family; adding, as she rose, "but they own us body and soul." She
hurried out of the dining-room without further remark. Miss Smith was
more patient with black folk than with white.

The sun was hanging just above the tallest trees of the swamp when Miss
Taylor, weary with the day's work, climbed into the buggy beside Bles.
They wheeled comfortably down the road, leaving the sombre swamp, with
its black-green, to the right, and heading toward the golden-green of
waving cotton fields. Miss Taylor lay back, listlessly, and drank the
soft warm air of the languorous Spring. She thought of the golden sheen
of the cotton, and the cold March winds of New England; of her brother
who apparently noted nothing of leaves and winds and seasons; and of the
mighty Cresswells whom Miss Smith so evidently disliked. Suddenly she
became aware of her long silence and the silence of the boy.

"Bles," she began didactically, "where are you from?"

He glanced across at her and answered shortly:

"Georgia, ma'am," and was silent.

The girl tried again.

"Georgia is a large State,"--tentatively.

"Yes, ma'am."

"Are you going back there when you finish?"

"I don't know."

"I think you ought to--and work for your people."

"Yes, ma'am."

She stopped, puzzled, and looked about. The old horse jogged lazily on,
and Bles switched him unavailingly. Somehow she had missed the way
today. The Veil hung thick, sombre, impenetrable. Well, she had done her
duty, and slowly she nestled back and watched the far-off green and
golden radiance of the cotton.

"Bles," she said impulsively, "shall I tell you of the Golden Fleece?"

He glanced at her again.

"Yes'm, please," he said.

She settled herself almost luxuriously, and began the story of Jason and
the Argonauts.

The boy remained silent. And when she had finished, he still sat silent,
elbow on knee, absently flicking the jogging horse and staring ahead at
the horizon. She looked at him doubtfully with some disappointment that
his hearing had apparently shared so little of the joy of her telling;
and, too, there was mingled a vague sense of having lowered herself to
too familiar fellowship with this--this boy. She straightened herself
instinctively and thought of some remark that would restore proper
relations. She had not found it before he said, slowly:

"All yon is Jason's."

"What?" she asked, puzzled.

He pointed with one sweep of his long arm to the quivering mass of
green-gold foliage that swept from swamp to horizon.

"All yon golden fleece is Jason's now," he repeated.

"I thought it was--Cresswell's," she said.

"That's what I mean."

She suddenly understood that the story had sunk deeply.

"I am glad to hear you say that," she said methodically, "for Jason was
a brave adventurer--"

"I thought he was a thief."

"Oh, well--those were other times."

"The Cresswells are thieves now."

Miss Taylor answered sharply.

"Bles, I am ashamed to hear you talk so of your neighbors simply because
they are white."

But Bles continued.

"This is the Black Sea," he said, pointing to the dull cabins that
crouched here and there upon the earth, with the dark twinkling of their
black folk darting out to see the strangers ride by.

Despite herself Miss Taylor caught the allegory and half whispered, "Lo!
the King himself!" as a black man almost rose from the tangled earth at
their side. He was tall and thin and sombre-hued, with a carven face and
thick gray hair.

"Your servant, mistress," he said, with a sweeping bow as he strode
toward the swamp. Miss Taylor stopped him, for he looked interesting,
and might answer some of her brother's questions. He turned back and
stood regarding her with sorrowful eyes and ugly mouth.

"Do you live about here?" she asked.

"I'se lived here a hundred years," he answered. She did not believe it;
he might be seventy, eighty, or even ninety--indeed, there was about him
that indefinable sense of age--some shadow of endless living; but a
hundred seemed absurd.

"You know the people pretty well, then?"

"I knows dem all. I knows most of 'em better dan dey knows demselves. I
knows a heap of tings in dis world and in de next."

"This is a great cotton country?"

"Dey don't raise no cotton now to what dey used to when old Gen'rel
Cresswell fust come from Carolina; den it was a bale and a half to the
acre on stalks dat looked like young brushwood. Dat was cotton."

"You know the Cresswells, then?"

"Know dem? I knowed dem afore dey was born."

"They are--wealthy people?"

"Dey rolls in money and dey'se quality, too. No shoddy upstarts dem,
but born to purple, lady, born to purple. Old Gen'ral Cresswell had
niggers and acres no end back dere in Carolina. He brung a part of dem
here and here his son, de father of dis Colonel Cresswell, was born. De
son--I knowed him well--he had a tousand niggers and ten tousand acres
afore de war."

"Were they kind to their slaves?"

"Oh, yaas, yaas, ma'am, dey was careful of de're niggers and wouldn't
let de drivers whip 'em much."

"And these Cresswells today?"

"Oh, dey're quality--high-blooded folks--dey'se lost some land and
niggers, but, lordy, nuttin' can buy de Cresswells, dey naturally owns
de world."

"Are they honest and kind?"

"Oh, yaas, ma'am--dey'se good white folks."

"Good white folk?"

"Oh, yaas, ma'am--course you knows white folks will be white
folks--white folks will be white folks. Your servant, ma'am." And the
swamp swallowed him.

The boy's eyes followed him as he whipped up the horse.

"He's going to Elspeth's," he said.

"Who is he?"

"We just call him Old Pappy--he's a preacher, and some folks say a
conjure man, too."

"And who is Elspeth?"

"She lives in the swamp--she's a kind of witch, I reckon, like--like--"

"Like Medea?"

"Yes--only--I don't know--" and he grew thoughtful.

The road turned now and far away to the eastward rose the first
straggling cabins of the town. Creeping toward them down the road rolled
a dark squat figure. It grew and spread slowly on the horizon until it
became a fat old black woman, hooded and aproned, with great round hips
and massive bosom. Her face was heavy and homely until she looked up and
lifted the drooping cheeks, and then kindly old eyes beamed on the young
teacher, as she curtsied and cried:

"Good-evening, honey! Good-evening! You sure is pretty dis evening."

"Why, Aunt Rachel, how are you?" There was genuine pleasure in the
girl's tone.

"Just tolerable, honey, bless de Lord! Rumatiz is kind o' bad and Aunt
Rachel ain't so young as she use ter be."

"And what brings you to town afoot this time of day?"

The face fell again to dull care and the old eyes crept away. She
fumbled with her cane.

"It's de boys again, honey," she returned solemnly; "dey'se good boys,
dey is good to de're old mammy, but dey'se high strung and dey gits
fighting and drinking and--and--last Saturday night dey got took up
again. I'se been to Jedge Grey--I use to tote him on my knee,
honey--I'se been to him to plead him not to let 'em go on de gang,
'cause you see, honey," and she stroked the girl's sleeve as if pleading
with her, too, "you see it done ruins boys to put 'em on de gang."

Miss Taylor tried hard to think of something comforting to say, but
words seemed inadequate to cheer the old soul; but after a few moments
they rode on, leaving the kind face again beaming and dimpling.

And now the country town of Toomsville lifted itself above the cotton
and corn, fringed with dirty straggling cabins of black folk. The road
swung past the iron watering trough, turned sharply and, after passing
two or three pert cottages and a stately house, old and faded, opened
into the wide square. Here pulsed the very life and being of the land.
Yonder great bales of cotton, yellow-white in its soiled sacking, piled
in lofty, dusty mountains, lay listening for the train that, twice a
day, ran out to the greater world. Round about, tied to the well-gnawed
hitching rails, were rows of mules--mules with back cloths; mules with
saddles; mules hitched to long wagons, buggies, and rickety gigs; mules
munching golden ears of corn, and mules drooping their heads in
sorrowful memory of better days.

Beyond the cotton warehouse smoked the chimneys of the seed-mill and the
cotton-gin; a red livery-stable faced them and all about three sides of
the square ran stores; big stores and small wide-windowed, narrow
stores. Some had old steps above the worn clay side-walks, and some were
flush with the ground. All had a general sense of dilapidation--save
one, the largest and most imposing, a three-story brick. This was
Caldwell's "Emporium"; and here Bles stopped and Miss Taylor entered.

Mr. Caldwell himself hurried forward; and the whole store, clerks and
customers, stood at attention, for Miss Taylor was yet new to the
county.

She bought a few trifles and then approached her main business.

"My brother wants some information about the county, Mr. Caldwell, and I
am only a teacher, and do not know much about conditions here."

"Ah! where do you teach?" asked Mr. Caldwell. He was certain he knew the
teachers of all the white schools in the county. Miss Taylor told him.
He stiffened slightly but perceptibly, like a man clicking the buckles
of his ready armor, and two townswomen who listened gradually turned
their backs, but remained near.

"Yes--yes," he said, with uncomfortable haste. "Any--er--information--of
course--" Miss Taylor got out her notes.

"The leading land-owners," she began, sorting the notes searchingly, "I
should like to know something about them."

"Well, Colonel Cresswell is, of course, our greatest landlord--a
high-bred gentleman of the old school. He and his son--a worthy
successor to the name--hold some fifty thousand acres. They may be
considered representative types. Then, Mr. Maxwell has ten thousand
acres and Mr. Tolliver a thousand."

Miss Taylor wrote rapidly. "And cotton?" she asked.

"We raise considerable cotton, but not nearly what we ought to; nigger
labor is too worthless."

"Oh! The Negroes are not, then, very efficient?"

"Efficient!" snorted Mr. Caldwell; at last she had broached a phase of
the problem upon which he could dilate with fervor. "They're the
lowest-down, ornriest--begging your pardon--good-for-nothing loafers you
ever heard of. Why, we just have to carry them and care for them like
children. Look yonder," he pointed across the square to the court-house.
It was an old square brick-and-stucco building, sombre and stilted and
very dirty. Out of it filed a stream of men--some black and shackled;
some white and swaggering and liberal with tobacco-juice; some white and
shaven and stiff. "Court's just out," pursued Mr. Caldwell, "and them
niggers have just been sent to the gang--young ones, too; educated but
good for nothing. They're all that way."

Miss Taylor looked up a little puzzled, and became aware of a battery of
eyes and ears. Everybody seemed craning and listening, and she felt a
sudden embarrassment and a sense of half-veiled hostility in the air.
With one or two further perfunctory questions, and a hasty expression of
thanks, she escaped into the air.

The whole square seemed loafing and lolling--the white world perched on
stoops and chairs, in doorways and windows; the black world filtering
down from doorways to side-walk and curb. The hot, dusty quadrangle
stretched in dreary deadness toward the temple of the town, as if doing
obeisance to the court-house. Down the courthouse steps the sheriff,
with Winchester on shoulder, was bringing the last prisoner--a
curly-headed boy with golden face and big brown frightened eyes.

"It's one of Dunn's boys," said Bles. "He's drunk again, and they say
he's been stealing. I expect he was hungry." And they wheeled out of the
square.

Miss Taylor was tired, and the hastily scribbled letter which she
dropped into the post in passing was not as clearly expressed as she
could wish.

A great-voiced giant, brown and bearded, drove past them, roaring a
hymn. He greeted Bles with a comprehensive wave of the hand.

"I guess Tylor has been paid off," said Bles, but Miss Taylor was too
disgusted to answer. Further on they overtook a tall young yellow boy
walking awkwardly beside a handsome, bold-faced girl. Two white men came
riding by. One leered at the girl, and she laughed back, while the
yellow boy strode sullenly ahead. As the two white riders approached the
buggy one said to the other:

"Who's that nigger with?"

"One of them nigger teachers."

"Well, they'll stop this damn riding around or they'll hear something,"
and they rode slowly by.

Miss Taylor felt rather than heard their words, and she was
uncomfortable. The sun fell fast; the long shadows of the swamp swept
soft coolness on the red road. Then afar in front a curled cloud of
white dust arose and out of it came the sound of galloping horses.

"Who's this?" asked Miss Taylor.

"The Cresswells, I think; they usually ride to town about this time."
But already Miss Taylor had descried the brown and tawny sides of the
speeding horses.

"Good gracious!" she thought. "The Cresswells!" And with it came a
sudden desire not to meet them--just then. She glanced toward the swamp.
The sun was sifting blood-red lances through the trees. A little
wagon-road entered the wood and disappeared. Miss Taylor saw it.

"Let's see the sunset in the swamp," she said suddenly. On came the
galloping horses. Bles looked up in surprise, then silently turned into
the swamp. The horses flew by, their hoof-beats dying in the distance. A
dark green silence lay about them lit by mighty crimson glories beyond.
Miss Taylor leaned back and watched it dreamily till a sense of
oppression grew on her. The sun was sinking fast.

"Where does this road come out?" she asked at last.

"It doesn't come out."

"Where does it go?"

"It goes to Elspeth's."

"Why, we must turn back immediately. I thought--" But Bles was already
turning. They were approaching the main road again when there came a
fluttering as of a great bird beating its wings amid the forest. Then a
girl, lithe, dark brown, and tall, leaped lightly into the path with
greetings on her lips for Bles. At the sight of the lady she drew
suddenly back and stood motionless regarding Miss Taylor, searching her
with wide black liquid eyes. Miss Taylor was a little startled.

"Good--good-evening," she said, straightening herself.

The girl was still silent and the horse stopped. One tense moment pulsed
through all the swamp. Then the girl, still motionless--still looking
Miss Taylor through and through--said with slow deliberateness:

"I hates you."

The teacher in Miss Taylor strove to rebuke this unconventional greeting
but the woman in her spoke first and asked almost before she knew it--

"Why?"




_Five_

ZORA


Zora, child of the swamp, was a heathen hoyden of twelve wayward,
untrained years. Slight, straight, strong, full-blooded, she had dreamed
her life away in wilful wandering through her dark and sombre kingdom
until she was one with it in all its moods; mischievous, secretive,
brooding; full of great and awful visions, steeped body and soul in
wood-lore. Her home was out of doors, the cabin of Elspeth her port of
call for talking and eating. She had not known, she had scarcely seen, a
child of her own age until Bles Alwyn had fled from her dancing in the
night, and she had searched and found him sleeping in the misty morning
light. It was to her a strange new thing to see a fellow of like years
with herself, and she gripped him to her soul in wild interest and new
curiosity. Yet this childish friendship was so new and incomprehensible
a thing to her that she did not know how to express it. At first she
pounced upon him in mirthful, almost impish glee, teasing and mocking
and half scaring him, despite his fifteen years of young manhood.

"Yes, they is devils down yonder behind the swamp," she would whisper,
warningly, when, after the first meeting, he had crept back again and
again, half fascinated, half amused to greet her; "I'se seen 'em, I'se
heard 'em, 'cause my mammy is a witch."

The boy would sit and watch her wonderingly as she lay curled along the
low branch of the mighty oak, clinging with little curved limbs and
flying fingers. Possessed by the spirit of her vision, she would chant,
low-voiced, tremulous, mischievous:

"One night a devil come to me on blue fire out of a big red flower that
grows in the south swamp; he was tall and big and strong as anything,
and when he spoke the trees shook and the stars fell. Even mammy was
afeared; and it takes a lot to make mammy afeared, 'cause she's a witch
and can conjure. He said, 'I'll come when you die--I'll come when you
die, and take the conjure off you,' and then he went away on a big
fire."

"Shucks!" the boy would say, trying to express scornful disbelief when,
in truth, he was awed and doubtful. Always he would glance involuntarily
back along the path behind him. Then her low birdlike laughter would
rise and ring through the trees.

So passed a year, and there came the time when her wayward teasing and
the almost painful thrill of her tale-telling nettled him and drove him
away. For long months he did not meet her, until one day he saw her deep
eyes fixed longingly upon him from a thicket in the swamp. He went and
greeted her. But she said no word, sitting nested among the greenwood
with passionate, proud silence, until he had sued long for peace; then
in sudden new friendship she had taken his hand and led him through the
swamp, showing him all the beauty of her swamp-world--great shadowy oaks
and limpid pools, lone, naked trees and sweet flowers; the whispering
and flitting of wild things, and the winging of furtive birds. She had
dropped the impish mischief of her way, and up from beneath it rose a
wistful, visionary tenderness; a mighty half-confessed, half-concealed,
striving for unknown things. He seemed to have found a new friend.

And today, after he had taken Miss Taylor home and supped, he came out
in the twilight under the new moon and whistled the tremulous note that
always brought her.

"Why did you speak so to Miss Taylor?" he asked, reproachfully. She
considered the matter a moment.

"You don't understand," she said. "You can't never understand. I can see
right through people. You can't. You never had a witch for a mammy--did
you?"

"No."

"Well, then, you see I have to take care of you and see things for you."

"Zora," he said thoughtfully, "you must learn to read."

"What for?"

"So that you can read books and know lots of things."

"Don't white folks make books?"

"Yes--most of the books."

"Pooh! I knows more than they do now--a heap more."

"In some ways you do; but they know things that give them power and
wealth and make them rule."

"No, no. They don't really rule; they just thinks they rule. They just
got things--heavy, dead things. We black folks is got the _spirit_.
We'se lighter and cunninger; we fly right through them; we go and come
again just as we wants to. Black folks is wonderful."

He did not understand what she meant; but he knew what he wanted and he
tried again.

"Even if white folks don't know everything they know different things
from us, and we ought to know what they know."

This appealed to her somewhat.

"I don't believe they know much," she concluded; "but I'll learn to read
and just see."

"It will be hard work," he warned. But he had come prepared for
acquiescence. He took a primer from his pocket and, lighting a match,
showed her the alphabet.

"Learn those," he said.

"What for?" she asked, looking at the letters disdainfully.

"Because that's the way," he said, as the light flared and went out.

"I don't believe it," she disputed, disappearing in the wood and
returning with a pine-knot. They lighted it and its smoky flame threw
wavering shadows about. She turned the leaves till she came to a picture
which she studied intently.

"Is this about this?" she asked, pointing alternately to reading and
picture.

"Yes. And if you learn--"

"Read it," she commanded. He read the page.

"Again," she said, making him point out each word. Then she read it
after him, accurately, with more perfect expression. He stared at her.
She took the book, and with a nod was gone.

It was Saturday and dark. She never asked Bles to her home--to that
mysterious black cabin in mid-swamp. He thought her ashamed of it, and
delicately refrained from going. So tonight she slipped away, stopped
and listened till she heard his footsteps on the pike, and then flew
homeward. Presently the old black cabin loomed before her with its wide
flapping door. The old woman was bending over the fire, stirring some
savory mess, and a yellow girl with a white baby on one arm was placing
dishes on a rickety wooden table when Zora suddenly and noiselessly
entered the door.

"Come, is you? I 'lowed victuals would fetch you," grumbled the hag.

But Zora deigned no answer. She walked placidly to the table, where she
took up a handful of cold corn-bread and meat, and then went over and
curled up by the fire.

Elspeth and the girl talked and laughed coarsely, and the night wore
on.

By and by loud laughter and tramping came from the road--a sound of
numerous footsteps. Zora listened, leapt to her feet and started to the
door. The old crone threw an epithet after her; but she flashed through
the lighted doorway and was gone, followed by the oath and shouts from
the approaching men. In the hut night fled with wild song and revel, and
day dawned again. Out from some fastness of the wood crept Zora. She
stopped and bathed in a pool, and combed her close-clung hair, then
entered silently to breakfast.

Thus began in the dark swamp that primal battle with the Word. She hated
it and despised it, but her pride was in arms and her one great life
friendship in the balance. She fought her way with a dogged persistence
that brought word after word of praise and interest from Bles. Then,
once well begun, her busy, eager mind flew with a rapidity that
startled; the stories especially she devoured--tales of strange things
and countries and men gripped her imagination and clung to her memory.

"Didn't I tell you there was lots to learn?" he asked once.

"I knew it all," she retorted; "every bit. I'se thought it all before;
only the little things is different--and I like the little, strange
things."

Spring ripened to summer. She was reading well and writing some.

"Zora," he announced one morning under their forest oak, "you must go to
school."

She eyed him, surprised.

"Why?"

"You've found some things worth knowing in this world, haven't you,
Zora?"

"Yes," she admitted.

"But there are more--many, many more--worlds on worlds of things--you
have not dreamed of."

She stared at him, open-eyed, and a wonder crept upon her face battling
with the old assurance. Then she looked down at her bare brown feet and
torn gown.

"I've got a little money, Zora," he said quickly.

But she lifted her head.

"I'll earn mine," she said.

"How?" he asked doubtfully.

"I'll pick cotton."

"Can you?"

"Course I can."

"It's hard work."

She hesitated.

"I don't like to work," she mused. "You see, mammy's pappy was a king's
son, and kings don't work. I don't work; mostly I dreams. But I can
work, and I will--for the wonder things--and for you."

So the summer yellowed and silvered into fall. All the vacation days
Bles worked on the farm, and Zora read and dreamed and studied in the
wood, until the land lay white with harvest. Then, without warning, she
appeared in the cotton-field beside Bles, and picked.

It was hot, sore work. The sun blazed; her bent and untrained back
pained, and the soft little hands bled. But no complaint passed her
lips; her hands never wavered, and her eyes met his steadily and
gravely. She bade him good-night, cheerily, and then stole away to the
wood, crouching beneath the great oak, and biting back the groans that
trembled on her lips. Often, she fell supperless to sleep, with two
great tears creeping down her tired cheeks.

When school-time came there was not yet money enough, for cotton-picking
was not far advanced. Yet Zora would take no money from Bles, and worked
earnestly away.

Meantime there occurred to the boy the momentous question of clothes.
Had Zora thought of them? He feared not. She knew little of clothes and
cared less. So one day in town he dropped into Caldwell's "Emporium"
and glanced hesitantly at certain ready-made dresses. One caught his
eye. It came from the great Easterly mills in New England and was red--a
vivid red. The glowing warmth of this cloth of cotton caught the eye of
Bles, and he bought the gown for a dollar and a half.

He carried it to Zora in the wood, and unrolled it before her eyes that
danced with glad tears. Of course, it was long and wide; but he fetched
needle and thread and scissors, too. It was a full month after school
had begun when they, together back in the swamp, shadowed by the
foliage, began to fashion the wonderful garment. At the same time she
laid ten dollars of her first hard-earned money in his hands.

"You can finish the first year with this money," Bles assured her,
delighted, "and then next year you must come in to board; because, you
see, when you're educated you won't want to live in the swamp."

"I wants to live here always."

"But not at Elspeth's."

"No-o--not there, not there." And a troubled questioning trembled in her
eyes, but brought no answering thought in his, for he was busy with his
plans.

"Then, you see, Zora, if you stay here you'll need a new house, and
you'll want to learn how to make it beautiful."

"Yes, a beautiful, great castle here in the swamp," she dreamed; "but,"
and her face fell, "I can't get money enough to board in; and I don't
want to board in--I wants to be free."

He looked at her, curled down so earnestly at her puzzling task, and a
pity for the more than motherless child swept over him. He bent over
her, nervously, eagerly, and she laid down her sewing and sat silent and
passive with dark, burning eyes.

"Zora," he said, "I want you to do all this--for me."

"I will, if you wants me to," she said quietly, but with something in
her voice that made him look half startled into her beautiful eyes and
feel a queer flushing in his face. He stretched his hand out and taking
hers held it lightly till she quivered and drew away, bending again
over her sewing.

Then a nameless exaltation rose within his heart.

"Zora," he whispered, "I've got a plan."

"What is it?" she asked, still with bowed head.

"Listen, till I tell you of the Golden Fleece."

Then she too heard the story of Jason. Breathless she listened, dropping
her sewing and leaning forward, eager-eyed. Then her face clouded.

"Do you s'pose mammy's the witch?" she asked dubiously.

"No; she wouldn't give her own flesh and blood to help the thieving
Jason."

She looked at him searchingly.

"Yes, she would, too," affirmed the girl, and then she paused, still
intently watching him. She was troubled, and again a question eagerly
hovered on her lips. But he continued:

"Then we must escape her," he said gayly. "See! yonder lies the Silver
Fleece spread across the brown back of the world; let's get a bit of it,
and hide it here in the swamp, and comb it, and tend it, and make it the
beautifullest bit of all. Then we can sell it, and send you to school."

She sat silently bent forward, turning the picture in her mind. Suddenly
forgetting her trouble, she bubbled with laughter, and leaping up
clapped her hands.

"And I knows just the place!" she cried eagerly, looking at him with a
flash of the old teasing mischief--"down in the heart of the
swamp--where dreams and devils lives."

       *       *       *       *       *

Up at the school-house Miss Taylor was musing. She had been invited to
spend the summer with Mrs. Grey at Lake George, and such a
summer!--silken clothes and dainty food, motoring and golf, well-groomed
men and elegant women. She would not have put it in just that way, but
the vision came very close to spelling heaven to her mind. Not that she
would come to it vacant-minded, but rather as a trained woman, starved
for companionship and wanting something of the beauty and ease of life.
She sat dreaming of it here with rows of dark faces before her, and the
singsong wail of a little black reader with his head aslant and his
patched kneepants.

The day was warm and languorous, and the last pale mist of the Silver
Fleece peeped in at the windows. She tried to follow the third-reader
lesson with her finger, but persistently off she went, dreaming, to some
exquisite little parlor with its green and gold, the clink of dainty
china and hum of low voices, and the blue lake in the window; she would
glance up, the door would open softly and--

Just here she did glance up, and all the school glanced with her. The
drone of the reader hushed. The door opened softly, and upon the
threshold stood Zora. Her small feet and slender ankles were black and
bare; her dark, round, and broad-browed head and strangely beautiful
face were poised almost defiantly, crowned with a misty mass of waveless
hair, and lit by the velvet radiance of two wonderful eyes. And hanging
from shoulder to ankle, in formless, clinging folds, blazed the scarlet
gown.




_Six_

COTTON


The cry of the naked was sweeping the world. From the peasant toiling in
Russia, the lady lolling in London, the chieftain burning in Africa, and
the Esquimaux freezing in Alaska; from long lines of hungry men, from
patient sad-eyed women, from old folk and creeping children went up the
cry, "Clothes, clothes!" Far away the wide black land that belts the
South, where Miss Smith worked and Miss Taylor drudged and Bles and Zora
dreamed, the dense black land sensed the cry and heard the bound of
answering life within the vast dark breast. All that dark earth heaved
in mighty travail with the bursting bolls of the cotton while black
attendant earth spirits swarmed above, sweating and crooning to its
birth pains.

After the miracle of the bursting bolls, when the land was brightest
with the piled mist of the Fleece, and when the cry of the naked was
loudest in the mouths of men, a sudden cloud of workers swarmed between
the Cotton and the Naked, spinning and weaving and sewing and carrying
the Fleece and mining and minting and bringing the Silver till the Song
of Service filled the world and the poetry of Toil was in the souls of
the laborers. Yet ever and always there were tense silent white-faced
men moving in that swarm who felt no poetry and heard no song, and one
of these was John Taylor.

He was tall, thin, cold, and tireless and he moved among the Watchers of
this World of Trade. In the rich Wall Street offices of Grey and
Easterly, Brokers, Mr. Taylor, as chief and confidential clerk surveyed
the world's nakedness and the supply of cotton to clothe it. The object
of his watching was frankly stated to himself and to his world. He
purposed going into business neither for his own health nor for the
healing or clothing of the peoples but to apply his knowledge of the
world's nakedness and of black men's toil in such a way as to bring
himself wealth. In this he was but following the teaching of his highest
ideal, lately deceased, Mr. Job Grey. Mr. Grey had so successfully
manipulated the cotton market that while black men who made the cotton
starved in Alabama and white men who bought it froze in Siberia, he
himself sat--

     _"High on a throne of royal state
     That far outshone the wealth
     Of Ormuz or of Ind._"

Notwithstanding this he died eventually, leaving the burden of his
wealth to his bewildered wife, and his business to the astute Mr.
Easterly; not simply to Mr. Easterly, but in a sense to his spiritual
heir, John Taylor.

To be sure Mr. Taylor had but a modest salary and no financial interest
in the business, but he had knowledge and business daring--effrontery
even--and the determination was fixed in his mind to be a millionaire at
no distant date. Some cautious fliers on the market gave him enough
surplus to send his sister Mary through the high school of his country
home in New Hampshire, and afterward through Wellesley College; although
just why a woman should want to go through college was inexplicable to
John Taylor, and he was still uncertain as to the wisdom of his charity.

When she had an offer to teach in the South, John Taylor hurried her off
for two reasons: he was profoundly interested in the cotton-belt, and
there she might be of service to him; and secondly, he had spent all the
money on her that he intended to at present, and he wanted her to go to
work. As an investment he did not consider Mary a success. Her letters
intimated very strongly her intention not to return to Miss Smith's
School; but they also brought information--disjointed and incomplete, to
be sure--which mightily interested Mr. Taylor and sent him to atlases,
encyclopÃ¦dias, and census-reports. When he went to that little lunch
with old Mrs. Grey he was not sure that he wanted his sister to leave
the cotton-belt just yet. After lunch he was sure that he did not want
her to leave.

The rich Mrs. Grey was at the crisis of her fortunes. She was an elderly
lady, in those uncertain years beyond fifty, and had been left suddenly
with more millions than she could easily count. Personally she was
inclined to spend her money in bettering the world right off, in such
ways as might from time to time seem attractive. This course, to her
husband's former partner and present executor, Mr. Edward Easterly, was
not only foolish but wicked, and, incidentally, distinctly unprofitable
to him. He had expressed himself strongly to Mrs. Grey last night at
dinner and had reinforced his argument by a pointed letter written this
morning.

To John Taylor Mrs. Grey's disposal of the income was unbelievable
blasphemy against the memory of a mighty man. He did not put this in
words to Mrs. Grey--he was only head clerk in her late husband's
office--but he became watchful and thoughtful. He ate his soup in
silence when she descanted on various benevolent schemes.

"Now, what do you know," she asked finally, "about Negroes--about
educating them?" Mr. Taylor over his fish was about to deny all
knowledge of any sort on the subject, but all at once he recollected his
sister, and a sudden gleam of light radiated his mental gloom.

"Have a sister who is--er--devoting herself to teaching them," he said.

"Is that so!" cried Mrs. Grey, joyfully. "Where is she?"

"In Tooms County, Alabama--in--" Mr. Taylor consulted a remote mental
pocket--"in Miss Sara Smith's school."

"Why, how fortunate! I'm so glad I mentioned the matter. You see, Miss
Smith is a sister of a friend of ours, Congressman Smith of New Jersey,
and she has just written to me for help; a very touching letter, too,
about the poor blacks. My father set great store by blacks and was a
leading abolitionist before he died."

Mr. Taylor was thinking fast. Yes, the name of Congressman Peter Smith
was quite familiar. Mr. Easterly, as chairman of the Republican State
Committee of New Jersey, had been compelled to discipline Mr. Smith
pretty severely for certain socialistic votes in the House, and
consequently his future career was uncertain. It was important that such
a man should not have too much to do with Mrs. Grey's philanthropies--at
least, in his present position.

"Should like to have you meet and talk with my sister, Mrs. Grey; she's
a Wellesley graduate," said Taylor, finally.

Mrs. Grey was delighted. It was a combination which she felt she needed.
Here was a college-girl who could direct her philanthropies and her
etiquette during the summer. Forthwith Mary Taylor received an
intimation from her brother that vast interests depended on her summer
vacation.

Thus it had happened that Miss Taylor came to Lake George for her
vacation after the first year at the Smith School, and she and Miss
Smith had silently agreed as she left that it would be better for her
not to return. But the gods of lower Broadway thought otherwise. Not
that Mary Taylor did not believe in Miss Smith's work, she was too
honest not to believe in education; but she was sure that this was not
her work, and she had not as yet perfected in her own mind any theory of
the world into which black folk fitted. She was rather taken back,
therefore, to be regarded as an expert on the problem. First her brother
attacked her, not simply on cotton, but, to her great surprise, on Negro
education; and after listening to her halting uncertain remarks, he
suggested to her certain matters which it would be better for her to
believe when Mrs. Grey talked to her.

"Interested in darkies, you see," he concluded, "and looks to you to
tell things. Better go easy and suggest a waiting-game before she goes
in heavy."

"But Miss Smith needs money--" the New England conscience prompted. John
Taylor cut in sharply:

"We all need money, and I know people who need Mrs. Grey's more than
Miss Smith does at present."

Miss Taylor found the Lake George colony charming. It was not
ultra-fashionable, but it had wealth and leisure and some breeding.
Especially was this true of a circumscribed, rather exclusive, set which
centred around the Vanderpools of New York and Boston. They, or rather
Mr. Vanderpool's connections, were of Old Dutch New York stock; his
father it was who had built the Lake George cottage.

Mrs. Vanderpool was a Wells of Boston, and endured Lake George now and
then during the summer for her husband's sake, although she regarded it
all as rather a joke. This summer promised to be unusually lonesome for
her, and she was meditating a retreat to the Massachusetts north shore
when she chanced to meet Mary Taylor, at a miscellaneous dinner, and
found her interesting. She discovered that this young woman knew things,
that she could talk books, and that she was rather pretty. To be sure
she knew no people, but Mrs. Vanderpool knew enough to even things.

"By the bye, I met some charming Alabama people last winter, in
Montgomery--the Cresswells; do you know them?" she asked one day, as
they were lounging in wicker chairs on the Vanderpool porch. Then she
answered the query herself: "No, of course you could not. It is too bad
that your work deprives you of the society of people of your class. Now
my ideal is a set of Negro schools where the white teachers _could_ know
the Cresswells."

"Why, yes--" faltered Miss Taylor; "but--wouldn't that be difficult?"

"Why should it be?"

"I mean, would the Cresswells approve of educating Negroes?"

"Oh, 'educating'! The word conceals so much. Now, I take it the
Cresswells would object to instructing them in French and in dinner
etiquette and tea-gowns, and so, in fact, would I; but teach them how to
handle a hoe and to sew and cook. I have reason to know that people like
the Cresswells would be delighted."

"And with the teachers of it?"

"Why not?--provided, of course, they were--well, gentlefolk and
associated accordingly."

"But one must associate with one's pupils."

"Oh, certainly, certainly; just as one must associate with one's maids
and chauffeurs and dressmakers--cordially and kindly, but with a
difference."

"But--but, dear Mrs. Vanderpool, you wouldn't want your children trained
that way, would you?"

"Certainly not, my dear. But these are not my children, they are the
children of Negroes; we can't quite forget that, can we?"

"No, I suppose not," Miss Taylor admitted, a little helplessly. "But--it
seems to me--that's the modern idea of taking culture to the masses."

"Frankly, then, the modern idea is not my idea; it is too socialistic.
And as for culture applied to the masses, you utter a paradox. The
masses and work is the truth one must face."

"And culture and work?"

"Quite incompatible, I assure you, my dear." She stretched her silken
limbs, lazily, while Miss Taylor sat silently staring at the waters.

Just then Mrs. Grey drove up in her new red motor.

Up to the time of Mary Taylor's arrival the acquaintance of the
Vanderpools and Mrs. Grey had been a matter chiefly of smiling bows.
After Miss Taylor came there had been calls and casual intercourse, to
Mrs. Grey's great gratification and Mrs. Vanderpool's mingled amusement
and annoyance. Mrs. Grey announced the arrival of the Easterlys and John
Taylor for the week-end. As Mrs. Vanderpool could think of nothing less
boring, she consented to dine.

The atmosphere of Mrs. Grey's ornate cottage was different from that of
the Vanderpools. The display of wealth and splendor had a touch of the
barbaric. Mary Taylor liked it, although she found the Vanderpool
atmosphere more subtly satisfying. There was a certain grim power
beneath the Greys' mahogany and velvets that thrilled while it appalled.
Precisely that side of the thing appealed to her brother. He would have
seen little or nothing in the plain elegance yonder, while here he saw a
Japanese vase that cost no cent less than a thousand dollars. He meant
to be able to duplicate it some day. He knew that Grey was poor and less
knowing than he sixty years ago.

The dead millionaire had begun his fortune by buying and selling
cotton--travelling in the South in reconstruction times, and sending his
agents. In this way he made his thousands. Then he took a step forward,
and instead of following the prices induced the prices to follow him.
Two or three small cotton corners brought him his tens of thousands.
About this time Easterly joined him and pointed out a new road--the
buying and selling of stock in various cotton-mills and other industrial
enterprises. Grey hesitated, but Easterly pushed him on and he made his
hundreds of thousands. Then Easterly proposed buying controlling
interests in certain large mills and gradually consolidating them. The
plan grew and succeeded, and Grey made his millions.

Then Grey stopped; he had money enough, and he would venture no farther.
He "was going to retire and eat peanuts," he said with a chuckle.

Easterly was disgusted. He, too, had made millions--not as many as Grey,
but a few. It was not, however, simply money that he wanted, but power.
The lust of financial dominion had gripped his soul, and he had a vision
of a vast trust of cotton manufacturing covering the land. He talked
this incessantly into Grey, but Grey continued to shake his head; the
thing was too big for his imagination. He was bent on retiring, and just
as he had set the date a year hence he inadvertently died. On the whole,
Mr. Easterly was glad of his partner's definite withdrawal, since he
left his capital behind him, until he found his vast plans about to be
circumvented by Mrs. Grey withdrawing this capital from his control. "To
give to the niggers and Chinamen," he snorted to John Taylor, and strode
up and down the veranda. John Taylor removed his coat, lighted a black
cigar, and elevated his heels. The ladies were in the parlor, where the
female Easterlys were prostrating themselves before Mrs. Vanderpool.

"Just what is your plan?" asked Taylor, quite as if he did not know.

"Why, man, the transfer of a hundred millions of stock would give me
control of the cotton-mills of America. Think of it!--the biggest trust
next to steel."

"Why not bigger?" asked Taylor, imperturbably puffing away. Mr. Easterly
eyed him. He had regarded Taylor hitherto as a very valuable asset to
the business--had relied on his knowledge of routine, his judgment and
his honesty; but he detected tonight a new tone in his clerk, something
almost authoritative and self-reliant. He paused and smiled at him.

"Bigger?"

But John Taylor was dead in earnest. He did not smile.

"First, there's England--and all Europe; why not bring them into the
trust?"

"Possibly, later; but first, America. Of course, I've got my eyes on the
European situation and feelers out; but such matters are more difficult
and slower of adjustment over there--so damned much law and gospel."

"But there's another side."

"What's that?"

"You are planning to combine and control the manufacture of cotton--"

"Yes."

"But how about your raw material? The steel trust owns its iron mines."

"Of course--mines could be monopolized and hold the trust up; but our
raw material is perfectly safe--farms growing smaller, farms isolated,
and we fixing the price. It's a cinch."

"Are you sure?" Taylor surveyed him with a narrowed look.

"Certain."

"I'm not. I've been looking up things, and there are three points you'd
better study: First, cotton farms are not getting smaller; they're
getting bigger almighty fast, and there's a big cotton-land monopoly in
sight. Second, the banks and wholesale houses in the South _can_ control
the cotton output if they work together. Third, watch the Southern
'Farmers' League' of big landlords."

Mr. Easterly threw away his cigar and sat down. Taylor straightened up,
switched on the porch light, and took a bundle of papers from his coat
pocket.

"Here are census figures," he said, "commercial reports and letters."
They pored over them a half hour. Then Easterly arose.

"There's something in it," he admitted, "but what can we do? What do you
propose?"

"Monopolize the growth as well as the manufacture of cotton, and use
the first to club European manufacturers into submission."

Easterly stared at him.

"Good Lord!" he ejaculated; "you're crazy!"

But Taylor smiled a slow, thin smile, and put away his papers. Easterly
continued to stare at his subordinate with a sort of fascination, with
the awe that one feels when genius unexpectedly reveals itself from a
source hitherto regarded as entirely ordinary. At last he drew a long
breath, remarking indefinitely:

"I'll think it over."

A stir in the parlor indicated departure.

"Well, you watch the Farmers' League, and note its success and methods,"
counselled John Taylor, his tone and manner unchanged. "Then figure what
it might do in the hands of--let us say, friends."

"Who's running it?"

"A Colonel Cresswell is its head, and happens also to be the force
behind it. Aristocratic family--big planter--near where my sister
teaches."

"H'm--well, we'll watch _him_."

"And say," as Easterly was turning away, "you know Congressman Smith?"

"I should say I did."

"Well, Mrs. Grey seems to be depending on him for advice in distributing
some of her charity funds."

Easterly appeared startled.

"She is, is she!" he exclaimed. "But here come the ladies." He went
forward at once, but John Taylor drew back. He noted Mrs. Vanderpool,
and thought her too thin and pale. The dashing young Miss Easterly was
more to his taste. He intended to have a wife like that one of these
days.

"Mary," said he to his sister as he finally rose to go, "tell me about
the Cresswells."

Mary explained to him at length the impossibility of her knowing much
about the local white aristocracy of Tooms County, and then told him all
she had heard.

"Mrs. Grey talked to you much?"

"Yes."

"About darky schools?"

"Yes."

"What does she intend to do?"

"I think she will aid Miss Smith first."

"Did you suggest anything?"

"Well, I told her what I thought about coÃ¶perating with the local white
people."

"The Cresswells?"

"Yes--you see Mrs. Vanderpool knows the Cresswells."

"Does, eh? Good! Say, that's a good point. You just bear heavy on
it--coÃ¶perate with the Cresswells."

"Why, yes. But--you see, John, I don't just know whether one _could_
coÃ¶perate with the Cresswells or not--one hears such contradictory
stories of them. But there must be some other white people--"

"Stuff! It's the Cresswells we want."

"Well," Mary was very dubious, "they are--the most important."




_Seven_


THE PLACE OF DREAMS

When she went South late in September, Mary Taylor had two definite but
allied objects: she was to get all possible business information
concerning the Cresswells, and she was to induce Miss Smith to prepare
for Mrs. Grey's benevolence by interesting the local whites in her work.
The programme attracted Miss Taylor. She felt in touch, even if dimly
and slightly, with great industrial movements, and she felt, too, like a
discerning pioneer in philanthropy. Both roles she liked. Besides, they
held, each, certain promises of social prestige; and society, Miss
Taylor argued, one must have even in Alabama.

Bles Alwyn met her at the train. He was growing to be a big fine bronze
giant, and Mary was glad to see him. She especially tried, in the first
few weeks of opening school, to glean as much information as possible
concerning the community, and particularly the Cresswells. She found the
Negro youth quicker, surer, and more intelligent in his answers than
those she questioned elsewhere, and she gained real enjoyment from her
long talks with him.

"Isn't Bles developing splendidly?" she said to Miss Smith one
afternoon. There was an unmistakable note of enthusiasm in her voice.
Miss Smith slowly closed her letter-file but did not look up.

"Yes," she said crisply. "He's eighteen now--quite a man."

"And most interesting to talk with."

"H'm--very"--drily. Mary was busy with her own thoughts, and she did not
notice the other woman's manner.

"Do you know," she pursued, "I'm a little afraid of one thing."

"So am I."

"Oh, you've noted it, too?--his friendship for that impossible girl,
Zora?"

Miss Smith gave her a searching look.

"What of it?" she demanded.

"She is so far beneath him."

"How so?"

"She is a bold, godless thing; I don't understand her."

"The two are not quite the same."

"Of course not; but she is unnaturally forward."

"Too bright," Miss Smith amplified.

"Yes; she knows quite too much. You surely remember that awful scarlet
dress? Well, all her clothes have arrived, or remained, at a simplicity
and vividness that is--well--immodest."

"Does she think them immodest?"

"What she thinks is a problem."

"_The_ problem, you mean?"

"Well, yes."

They paused a moment. Then Miss Smith said slowly: "What I don't
understand, I don't judge."

"No, but you can't always help seeing and meeting it," laughed Miss
Taylor.

"Certainly not. I don't try; I court the meeting and seeing. It is the
only way."

"Well, perhaps, for us--but not for a boy like Bles, and a girl like
Zora."

"True; men and women must exercise judgment in their intercourse
and"--she glanced sharply at Miss Taylor--"my dear, you yourself must
not forget that Bles Alwyn is a man."

Far up the road came a low, long, musical shouting; then with creaking
and straining of wagons, four great black mules dashed into sight with
twelve bursting bales of yellowish cotton looming and swaying behind.
The drivers and helpers were lolling and laughing and singing, but Miss
Taylor did not hear nor see. She had sat suddenly upright; her face had
flamed crimson, and then went dead white.

"Miss--Miss Smith!" she gasped, overwhelmed with dismay, a picture of
wounded pride and consternation.

Miss Smith turned around very methodically and took her hand; but while
she spoke the girl merely stared at her in stony silence.

"Now, dear, don't mean more than I do. I'm an old woman, and I've seen
many things. This is but a little corner of the world, and yet many
people pass here in thirty years. The trouble with new teachers who come
is, that like you, they cannot see black folk as human. All to them are
either impossible Zoras, or else lovable Blessings. They forget that
Zora is not to be annihilated, but studied and understood, and that Bles
is a young man of eighteen and not a clod."

"But that he should dare--" Mary began breathlessly.

"He hasn't dared," Miss Smith went gently on. "No thought of you but as
a teacher has yet entered his dear, simple head. But, my point is simply
this: he's a man, and a human one, and if you keep on making much over
him, and talking to him and petting him, he'll have the right to
interpret your manner in his own way--the same that any young man
would."

"But--but, he's a--a--"

"A Negro. To be sure, he is; and a man in addition. Now, dear, don't
take this too much to heart; this is not a rebuke, but a clumsy warning.
I am simply trying to make clear to you _why_ you should be careful.
Treat poor Zora a little more lovingly, and Bles a little less warmly.
They are just human--but, oh! so human."

Mary Taylor rose up stiffly and mumbled a brief good-night. She went to
her room, and sat down in the dark. The mere mention of the thing was to
her so preposterous--no, loathsome, she kept repeating.

She slowly undressed in the dark, and heard the rumbling of the cotton
wagons as they swayed toward town. The cry of the Naked was sweeping the
world, and yonder in the night black men were answering the call. They
knew not what or why they answered, but obeyed the irresistible call,
with hearts light and song upon their lips--the Song of Service. They
lashed their mules and drank their whiskey, and all night the piled
fleece swept by Mary Taylor's window, flying--flying to that far cry.
Miss Taylor turned uneasily in her bed and jerked the bed-clothes about
her ears.

"Mrs. Vanderpool is right," she confided to the night, with something of
the awe with which one suddenly comprehends a hidden oracle; "there must
be a difference, always, always! That impudent Negro!"

All night she dreamed, and all day,--especially when trim and immaculate
she sat in her chair and looked down upon fifty dark faces--and upon
Zora.

Zora sat thinking. She saw neither Miss Taylor nor the long straight
rows of desks and faces. She heard neither the drone of the spellers nor
did she hear Miss Taylor say, "Zora!" She heard and saw none of this.
She only heard the prattle of the birds in the wood, far down where the
Silver Fleece would be planted.

For the time of cotton-planting was coming; the gray and drizzle of
December was past and the hesitation, of January. Already a certain
warmth and glow had stolen into the air, and the Swamp was calling its
child with low, seductive voice. She knew where the first leaves were
bursting, where tiny flowers nestled, and where young living things
looked upward to the light and cried and crawled. A wistful longing was
stealing into her heart. She wanted to be free. She wanted to run and
dance and sing, but Bles wanted--

"Zora!"

This time she heard the call, but did not heed it. Miss Taylor was very
tiresome, and was forever doing and saying silly things. So Zora paid no
attention, but sat still and thought. Yes, she would show Bles the place
that very night; she had kept it secret from him until now, out of
perverseness, out of her love of mystery and secrets. But tonight, after
school, when he met her on the big road with the clothes, she would take
him and show him the chosen spot.

Soon she was aware that school had been dismissed, and she leisurely
gathered up her books and rose. Mary Taylor regarded her in perplexed
despair. Oh, these people! Mrs. Vanderpool was right: culture and--some
masses, at least--were not to be linked; and, too, culture and
work--were they incompatible? At any rate, culture and _this_ work were.

Now, there was Mrs. Vanderpool--she toiled not, neither did she spin,
and yet! If all these folk were like poor, stupid, docile Jennie it
would be simpler, but what earthly sense was there in trying do to
anything with a girl like Zora, so stupid in some matters, so
startlingly bright in others, and so stubborn in everything? Here, she
was doing some work twice as well and twice as fast as the class, and
other work she would not touch because she "didn't like it." Her
classification in school was nearly as difficult as her classification
in the world, and Miss Taylor reached up impatiently and removed the
gold pin from her stock to adjust it more comfortably when Zora
sauntered past unseeing, unheeding, with that curious gliding walk which
Miss Taylor called stealthy. She laid the pin on the desk and on sudden
impulse spoke again to the girl as she arranged her neck trimmings.

"Zora," she said evenly, "why didn't you come to class when I called?"

"I didn't hear you," said Zora, looking at her full-eyed and telling the
half-truth easily.

Miss Taylor was sure Zora was lying, and she knew that she had lied to
her on other occasions. Indeed, she had found lying customary in this
community, and she had a New England horror of it. She looked at Zora
disapprovingly, while Zora looked at her quite impersonally, but
steadily. Then Miss Taylor braced herself, mentally, and took the war
into Africa.

"Do you ever tell lies, Zora?"

"Yes."

"Don't you know that is a wicked, bad habit?"

"Why?"

"Because God hates them."

"How does _you_ know He does?" Zora's tone was still impersonal.

"He hates all evil."

"But why is lies evil?"

"Because they make us deceive each other."

"Is that wrong?"

"Yes."

Zora bent forward and looked squarely into Miss Taylor's blue eyes. Miss
Taylor looked into the velvet blackness of hers and wondered what they
veiled.

"Is it wrong," asked Zora, "to make believe you likes people when you
don't, when you'se afeared of them and thinks they may rub off and dirty
you?"

"Why--why--yes, if you--if you, deceive."

"Then you lies sometimes, don't you?"

Miss Taylor stared helplessly at the solemn eyes that seemed to look so
deeply into her.

"Perhaps--I do, Zora; I'm sure I don't mean to, and--I hope God will
forgive me."

Zora softened.

"Oh, I reckon He will if He's a good God, because He'd know that lies
like that are heaps better than blabbing the truth right out. Only," she
added severely, "you mustn't keep saying it's wicked to lie 'cause it
ain't. Sometimes I lies," she reflected pensively, "and sometimes I
don't--it depends."

Miss Taylor forgot her collar, and fingered the pin on the desk. She
felt at once a desperate desire to know this girl better and to
establish her own authority. Yet how should she do it? She kept toying
with the pin, and Zora watched her. Then Miss Taylor said, absently:

"Zora, what do you propose to do when you grow up?"

Zora considered.

"Think and walk--and rest," she concluded.

"I mean, what work?"

"Work? Oh, I sha'n't work. I don't like work--do you?"

Miss Taylor winced, wondering if the girl were lying again. She said
quickly:

"Why, yes--that is, I like some kinds of work."

"What kinds?"

But Miss Taylor refused to have the matter made personal, as Zora had a
disconcerting way of pointing all their discussions.

"Everybody likes some kinds of work," she insisted.

"If you likes it, it ain't work," declared Zora; but Mary Taylor
proceeded around her circumscribed circle:

"You might make a good cook, or a maid."

"I hate cooking. What's a maid?"

"Why, a woman who helps others."

"Helps folks that they love? I'd like that."

"It is not a question of affection," said Miss Taylor, firmly: "one is
paid for it."

"I wouldn't work for pay."

"But you'll have to, child; you'll have to earn a living."

"Do you work for pay?"

"I work to earn a living."

"Same thing, I reckon, and it ain't true. Living just comes free,
like--like sunshine."

"Stuff! Zora, your people must learn to work and work steadily and work
hard--" She stopped, for she was sure Zora was not listening; the far
away look was in her eyes and they were shining. She was beautiful as
she stood there--strangely, almost uncannily, but startlingly beautiful
with her rich dark skin, softly moulded features, and wonderful eyes.

"My people?--my people?" she murmured, half to herself. "Do you know my
people? They don't never work; they plays. They is all little, funny
dark people. They flies and creeps and crawls, slippery-like; and they
cries and calls. Ah, my people! my poor little people! they misses me
these days, because they is shadowy things that sing and smell and bloom
in dark and terrible nights--"

Miss Taylor started up. "Zora, I believe you're crazy!" she cried. But
Zora was looking at her calmly again.

"We'se both crazy, ain't we?" she returned, with a simplicity that left
the teacher helpless.

Miss Taylor hurried out, forgetting her pin. Zora looked it over
leisurely, and tried it on. She decided that she liked it, and putting
it in her pocket, went out too.

School was out but the sun was still high, as Bles hurried from the barn
up the big road beside the soft shadows of the swamp. His head was busy
with new thoughts and his lips were whistling merrily, for today Zora
was to show him the long dreamed of spot for the planting of the Silver
Fleece. He hastened toward the Cresswell mansion, and glanced anxiously
up the road. At last he saw her coming, swinging down the road, lithe
and dark, with the big white basket of clothes poised on her head.

"Zora," he yodled, and she waved her apron.

He eased her burden to the ground and they sat down together, he
nervous and eager; she silent, passive, but her eyes restless. Bles was
full of his plans.

"Zora," he said, "we'll make it the finest bale ever raised in Tooms;
we'll just work it to the inch--just love it into life."

She considered the matter intently.

"But,"--presently,--"how can we sell it without the Cresswells knowing?"

"We won't try; we'll just take it to them and give them half, like the
other tenants."

"But the swamp is mortal thick and hard to clear."

"We can do it."

Zora had sat still, listening; but now, suddenly, she leapt to her feet.

"Come," she said, "I'll take the clothes home, then we'll go"--she
glanced at him--"down where the dreams are." And laughing, they hurried
on.

Elspeth stood in the path that wound down to the cottage, and without a
word Zora dropped the basket at her feet. She turned back; but Bles,
struck by a thought, paused. The old woman was short, broad, black and
wrinkled, with yellow fangs, red hanging lips, and wicked eyes. She
leered at them; the boy shrank before it, but stood his ground.

"Aunt Elspeth," he began, "Zora and I are going to plant and tend some
cotton to pay for her schooling--just the very best cotton we can
find--and I heard"--he hesitated,--"I heard you had some wonderful
seed."

"Yes," she mumbled, "I'se got the seed--I'se got it--wonder seed, sowed
wid the three spells of Obi in the old land ten tousand moons ago. But
you couldn't plant it," with a sudden shrillness, "it would kill you."

"But--" Bles tried to object, but she waved him away.

"Git the ground--git the ground; dig it--pet it, and we'll see what
we'll see." And she disappeared.

Zora was not sure that it had been wise to tell their secret.

"I was going to steal the seed," she said. "I knows where it is, and I
don't fear conjure."

"You mustn't steal, Zora," said Bles, gravely.

"Why?" Zora quickly asked.

But before he answered, they both forgot; for their faces were turned
toward the wonder of the swamp. The golden sun was pouring floods of
glory through the slim black trees, and the mystic sombre pools caught
and tossed back the glow in darker, duller crimson. Long echoing cries
leapt to and fro; silent footsteps crept hither and yonder; and the
girl's eyes gleamed with a wild new joy.

"The dreams!" she cried. "The dreams!" And leaping ahead, she danced
along the shadowed path. He hastened after her, but she flew fast and
faster; he followed, laughing, calling, pleading. He saw her twinkling
limbs a-dancing as once he saw them dance in a halo of firelight; but
now the fire was the fire of the world. Her garments twined and flew in
shadowy drapings about the perfect moulding of her young and dark
half-naked figure. Her heavy hair had burst its fastenings and lay in
stiffened, straggling masses, bending reluctantly to the breeze, like
curled smoke; while all about, the mad, wild singing rose and fell and
trembled, till his head whirled. He paused uncertainly at a parting of
the paths, crying:

"Zora! Zora!" as for some lost soul. "Zora! Zora!" echoed the cry,
faintly.

Abruptly the music fell; there came a long slow-growing silence; and
then, with a flutter, she was beside him again, laughing in his ears and
crying with mocking voice:

"Is you afeared, honey?"

He saw in her eyes sweet yearnings, but could speak nothing. He could
only clasp her hand tightly, and again down they raced through the wood.

All at once the swamp changed and chilled to a dull grayness; tall,
dull trees started down upon the murky waters; and long pendent
streamings of moss-like tears dripped from tree to earth. Slowly and
warily they threaded their way.

"Are you sure of the path, Zora?" he once inquired anxiously.

"I could find it asleep," she answered, skipping sure-footed onward. He
continued to hold her hand tightly, and his own pace never slackened.
Around them the gray and death-like wilderness darkened. They felt and
saw the cold white mist rising slowly from the ground, and waters
growing blacker and broader.

At last they came to what seemed the end. Silently and dismally the
half-dead forest, with its ghostly moss, lowered and darkened, and the
black waters spread into a great silent lake of slimy ooze. The dead
trunk of a fallen tree lay straight in front, torn and twisted, its top
hidden yonder and mingled with impenetrable undergrowth.

"Where now, Zora?" he cried.

In a moment she had slipped her hand away and was scrambling upon the
tree trunk. The waters yawned murkily below.

"Careful! careful!" he warned, struggling after her until she
disappeared amid the leaves. He followed eagerly, but cautiously; and
all at once found himself confronting a paradise.

Before them lay a long island, opening to the south, on the black lake,
but sheltered north and east by the dense undergrowth of the black swamp
and the rampart of dead and living trees. The soil was virgin and black,
thickly covered over with a tangle of bushes, vines, and smaller growth
all brilliant with early leaves and wild flowers.

"A pretty tough proposition for clearing and ploughing," said Bles, with
practised eye. But Zora eagerly surveyed the prospect.

"It's where the Dreams lives," she whispered.

Meantime Miss Taylor had missed her brooch and searched for it in vain.
In the midst of this pursuit the truth occurred to her--Zora had stolen
it. Negroes would steal, everybody said. Well, she must and would have
the pin, and she started for Elspeth's cabin.

On the way she met the old woman in the path, but got little
satisfaction. Elspeth merely grunted ungraciously while eyeing the white
woman with suspicion.

Mary Taylor, again alone, sat down at a turn in the path, just out of
sight of the house, and waited. Soon she saw, with a certain grim
satisfaction, Zora and Bles emerging from the swamp engaged in earnest
conversation. Here was an opportunity to overwhelm both with an
unforgettable reprimand. She rose before them like a spectral vengeance.

"Zora, I want my pin."

Bles started and stared; but Zora eyed her calmly with something like
disdain.

"What pin?" she returned, unmoved.

"Zora, don't deny that you took my pin from the desk this afternoon,"
the teacher commanded severely.

"I didn't say I didn't take no pin."

"Persons who will lie and steal will do anything."

"Why shouldn't people do anything they wants to?"

"And you knew the pin was mine."

"I saw you a-wearing of it," admitted Zora easily.

"Then you have stolen it, and you are a thief."

Still Zora appeared to be unimpressed with the heinousness of her fault.

"Did you make that pin?" she asked.

"No, but it is mine."

"Why is it yours?"

"Because it was given to me."

"But you don't need it; you've got four other prettier ones--I counted."

"That makes no difference."

"Yes it does--folks ain't got no right to things they don't need."

"That makes no difference, Zora, and you know it. The pin is mine. You
stole it. If you had wanted a pin and asked me I might have given you--"

The girl blazed.

"I don't want your old gifts," she almost hissed. "You don't own what
you don't need and can't use. God owns it and I'm going to send it back
to Him."

With a swift motion she whipped the pin from her pocket and raised her
arm to hurl it into the swamp. Bles caught her hand. He caught it
lightly and smiled sorrowfully into her eyes. She wavered a moment, then
the answering light sprang to her face. Dropping the brooch into his
hand, she wheeled and fled toward the cabin.

Bles handed it silently to Miss Taylor. Mary Taylor was beside herself
with impatient anger--and anger intensified by a conviction of utter
helplessness to cope with any strained or unusual situations between
herself and these two.

"Alwyn," she said sharply, "I shall report Zora for stealing. And you
may report yourself to Miss Smith tonight for disrespect toward a
teacher."




_Eight_


MR. HARRY CRESSWELL


The Cresswells, father and son, were at breakfast. The daughter was
taking her coffee and rolls up stairs in bed.

"P'sh! I don't like it!" declared Harry Cresswell, tossing the letter
back to his father. "I tell you, it is a damned Yankee trick."

He was a man of thirty-five, smooth and white, slight, well-bred and
masterful. His father, St. John Cresswell, was sixty, white-haired,
mustached and goateed; a stately, kindly old man with a temper and much
family pride.

"Well, well," he said, his air half preoccupied, half unconcerned, "I
suppose so--and yet"--he read the letter again, aloud: "'Approaching you
as one of the most influential landowners of Alabama, on a confidential
matter'--h'm--h'm--'a combination of capital and power, such as this
nation has never seen'--'cotton manufacturers and cotton growers.' ...
Well, well! Of course, I suppose there's nothing in it. And yet, Harry,
my boy, this cotton-growing business is getting in a pretty tight pinch.
Unless relief comes somehow--well, we'll just have to quit. We simply
can't keep the cost of cotton down to a remunerative figure with niggers
getting scarcer and dearer. Every year I have to pinch 'em closer and
closer. I had to pay Maxwell two hundred and fifty to get that old darky
and his boys turned over to me, and one of the young ones has run away
already."

Harry lighted a cigarette.

"We must drive them more. You're too easy, father; they understand that.
By the way, what did that letter say about a 'sister'?"

"Says he's got a sister over at the nigger school whom perhaps we know.
I suppose he thinks we dine there occasionally." The old man chuckled.
"That reminds me, Elspeth is sending her girl there."

"What's that?" An angry gleam shot into the younger man's eye.

"Yes. She announced this morning, pert as you please, that she couldn't
tote clothes any more--she had to study."

"Damn it! This thing is going too far. We can't keep a maid or a
plough-boy on the place because of this devilish school. It's going to
ruin the whole labor system. We've been too mild and decent. I'm going
to put my foot down right here. I'll make Elspeth take that girl out of
school if I have to horse-whip her, and I'll warn the school against
further interference with our tenants. Here, in less than a week, go two
plough-hands--and now this girl."

The old man smiled.

"You'll hardly miss any work Zora does," he said.

"I'll make her work. She's giving herself too many damned airs. I know
who's back of this--it's that nigger we saw talking to the white woman
in the field the other day."

"Well, don't work yourself up. The wench don't amount to much anyhow. By
the way, though, if you do go to the school it won't hurt to see this
Taylor's sister and size the family up."

"Pshaw! I'm going to give the Smith woman such a scare that she'll keep
her hands off our niggers." And Harry Cresswell rode away.

Mary Taylor had charge of the office that morning, while Miss Smith,
shut up in her bedroom, went laboriously over her accounts. Miss Mary
suddenly sat up, threw a hasty glance into the glass and felt the back
of her belt. It was--it couldn't be--surely, it was Mr. Harry Cresswell
riding through the gateway on his beautiful white mare. He kicked the
gate open rather viciously, did not stop to close it, and rode straight
across the lawn. Miss Taylor noticed his riding breeches and leggings,
his white linen and white, clean-cut, high-bred face. Such apparitions
were few about the country lands. She felt inclined to flutter, but
gripped herself.

"Good-morning," she said, a little stiffly.

Mr. Cresswell halted and stared; then lifting the hat which he had
neglected to remove in crossing the hall, he bowed in stately grace.
Miss Taylor was no ordinary picture. Her brown hair was almost golden;
her dark eyes shone blue; her skin was clear and healthy, and her white
dress--happy coincidence!--had been laundered that very morning. Her
half-suppressed excitement at the sudden duty of welcoming the great
aristocrat of the county, gave a piquancy to her prettiness.

"The--devil!" commented Mr. Harry Cresswell to himself. But to Miss
Taylor:

"I beg pardon--er--Miss Smith?"

"No--I'm sorry. Miss Smith is engaged this morning. I am Miss Taylor."

"I cannot share Miss Taylor's sorrow," returned Mr. Cresswell gravely,
"for I believe I have the honor of some correspondence with Miss
Taylor's brother." Mr. Cresswell searched for the letter, but did not
find it.

"Oh! Has John written you?" She beamed suddenly. "I'm so glad. It's more
than he's done for me this three-month. I beg your pardon--do sit
down--I think you'll find this one easier. Our stock of chairs is
limited."

It was delightful to have a casual meeting receive this social stamp;
the girl was all at once transfigured--animated, glowing, lovely; all of
which did not escape the caller's appraising inspection.

"There!" said Mr. Cresswell. "I've left your gate gaping."

"Oh, don't mind ... I hope John's well?"

"The truth is," confessed Cresswell, "it was a business matter--cotton,
you know."

"John is nothing but cotton; I tell him his soul is fibrous."

"He mentioned your being here and I thought I'd drop over and welcome
you to the South."

"Thank you," returned Miss Taylor, reddening with pleasure despite
herself. There was a real sincerity in the tone. All this confirmed so
many convictions of hers.

"Of course, you know how it is in the South," Cresswell pursued, the
opening having been so easily accomplished.

"I understand perfectly."

"My sister would be delighted to meet you, but--"

"Oh I realize the--difficulties."

"Perhaps you wouldn't mind riding by some day--it's embarrassing to
suggest this, but, you know--"

Miss Taylor was perfectly self-possessed.

"Mr. Cresswell," she said seriously, "I know very well that it wouldn't
do for your sister to call here, and I sha'n't mind a bit coming by to
see her first. I don't believe in standing on stupid ceremony."

Cresswell thanked her with quiet cordiality, and suggested that when he
was driving by he might pick her up in his gig some morning. Miss Taylor
expressed her pleasure at the prospect. Then the talk wandered to
general matters--the rain, the trees, the people round about, and,
inevitably--the Negro.

"Oh, by the bye," said Mr. Cresswell, frowning and hesitating over the
recollection of his errand's purpose, "there was one matter"--he paused.
Miss Taylor leant forward, all interest. "I hardly know that I ought to
mention it, but your school--"

This charming young lady disarmed his truculent spirit, and the usually
collected and determined young man was at a loss how to proceed. The
girl, however, was obviously impressed and pleased by his evidence of
interest, whatever its nature; so in a manner vastly different from the
one he had intended to assume, he continued:

"There is a way in which we may be of service to you, and that is by
enlightening you upon points concerning which the nature of your
position--both as teacher and socially--must keep you in the dark.

"For instance, all these Negroes are, as you know, of wretchedly low
morals; but there are a few so depraved that it would be suicidal to
take them into this school. We recognize the good you are doing, but we
do not want it more than offset by utter lack of discrimination in
choosing your material."

"Certainly not--have we--" Miss Mary faltered. This beginning was a bit
ominous, wholly unexpected.

"There is a girl, Zora, who has just entered, who--I must speak
candidly--who ought not to be here; I thought it but right to let you
know."

"Thank you, so much. I'll tell Miss Smith." Mary Taylor suddenly felt
herself a judge of character. "I suspected that she was--not what she
ought to be. Believe me, we appreciate your interest."

A few more words, and Mr. Cresswell, after bending courteously over her
hand with a deference no New Englander had ever shown, was riding away
on his white mare.

For a while Mary Taylor sat very quietly. It was like a breath of air
from the real world, this hour's chat with a well-bred gentleman. She
wondered how she had done her part--had she been too eager and
school-girlish? Had she met this stately ceremony with enough breeding
to show that she too was somebody? She pounced upon Miss Smith the
minute that lady entered the office.

"Miss Smith, who do you think has been here?" she burst out
enthusiastically.

"I saw him on the lawn." There was a suspicious lack of warmth in this
brief affirmation.

"He was so gracious and kindly, and he knows my brother. And oh, Miss
Smith! we've got to send that Zora right away."

"Indeed"--the observation was not even interrogatory. The preceptress of
the struggling school for Negro children merely evinced patience for the
younger woman's fervency.

"Yes; he says she's utterly depraved."

"Said that, did he?" Miss Smith watched her with tranquil regard. Miss
Taylor paused.

"Of course, we cannot think of keeping her."

Miss Smith pursed her lips, offering her first expression of opinion.

"I guess we'll worry along with her a little while anyhow," she said.

The girl stared at Miss Smith in honest, if unpardonable, amazement.

"Do you mean to say that you are going to keep in this school a girl who
not only lies and steals but is positively--_immoral_?"

Miss Smith smiled, wholly unmoved.

"No; but I mean that _I_ am here to learn from those whose ideas of
right do not agree with mine, to discover _why_ they differ, and to let
them learn of me--so far as I am worthy."

Mary Taylor was not unappreciative of Miss Smith's stern
high-mindedness, but her heart hardened at this, to her, misdirected
zeal. Echo of the spirit of an older day, Miss Smith seemed, to her, to
be cramped and paralyzed in an armor of prejudice and sectionalisms.
Plain-speaking was the only course, and Mary, if a little complacent
perhaps in her frankness, was sincere in her purpose.

"I think, Miss Smith, you are making a very grave mistake. I regard
Zora as a very undesirable person from every point of view. I look upon
Mr. Cresswell's visit today as almost providential. He came offering an
olive branch from the white aristocracy to this work; to bespeak his
appreciation and safeguard the future. Moreover," and Miss Taylor's
voice gathered firmness despite Miss Smith's inscrutable eye, "moreover,
I have reason to know that the disposition--indeed, the plan--in certain
quarters to help this work materially depends very largely on your
willingness to meet the advances of the Southern whites half way."

She paused for a reply or a question. Receiving neither, she walked with
dignity up the stairs. From her window she could see Cresswell's
straight shoulders, as he rode toward town, and beyond him a black speck
in the road. But she could not see the smile on Mr. Cresswell's lips,
nor did she hear him remark twice, with seeming irrelevance, "The
devil!"

The rider, being closer to it, recognized in Mary Taylor's "black speck"
Bles Alwyn walking toward him rapidly with axe and hoe on shoulder,
whistling merrily. They saw each other almost at the same moment and
whistle and smile faded. Mr. Cresswell knew the Negro by sight and
disliked him. He belonged in his mind to that younger class of
half-educated blacks who were impudent and disrespectful toward their
superiors, not even touching his hat when he met a white man. Moreover,
he was sure that it was Miss Taylor with whom this boy had been talking
so long and familiarly in the cotton-field last Spring--an offence
doubly heinous now that he had seen Miss Taylor.

His first impulse was to halt the Negro then and there and tell him a
few plain truths. But he did not feel quarrelsome at the moment, and
there was, after all, nothing very tangible to justify a berating. The
fellow's impudence was sure to increase, and then! So he merely reined
his horse to the better part of the foot-path and rode on.

Bles, too, was thinking. He knew the well-dressed man with his
milk-white face and overbearing way. He would expect to be greeted with
raised hat but Bles bit his lips and pulled down his cap firmly. The
axe, too, in some indistinct way felt good in his hand. He saw the horse
coming in his pathway and stepping aside in the dust continued on his
way, neither looking nor speaking.

So they passed each other by, Mr. Cresswell to town, Bles to the swamp,
apparently ignorant of each other's very existence. Yet, as the space
widened between them, each felt a more vindictive anger for the other.

How dares the black puppy to ignore a Cresswell on the highway? If this
went on, the day would surely come when Negroes felt no respect or fear
whatever for whites? And then--my God! Mr. Cresswell struck his mare a
vicious blow and dashed toward town.

The black boy, too, went his way in silent, burning rage. Why should he
be elbowed into the roadside dust by an insolent bully? Why had he not
stood his ground? Pshaw! All this fine frenzy was useless, and he knew
it. The sweat oozed on his forehead. It wasn't man against man, or he
would have dragged the pale puppy from his horse and rubbed his face in
the earth. It wasn't even one against many, else how willingly, swinging
his axe, would have stood his ground before a mob.

No, it was one against a world, a world of power, opinion, wealth,
opportunity; and he, the one, must cringe and bear in silence lest the
world crash about the ears of his people. He slowly plodded on in bitter
silence toward the swamp. But the day was balmy, the way was beautiful;
contempt slowly succeeded anger, and hope soon triumphed over all. For
yonder was Zora, poised, waiting. And behind her lay the Field of
Dreams.




_Nine_


THE PLANTING


Zora looked down upon Bles, where he stood to his knees in mud. The toil
was beyond exhilaration--it was sickening weariness and panting despair.
The great roots, twined in one unbroken snarl, clung frantically to the
black soil. The vines and bushes fought back with thorn and bramble.
Zora stood wiping the blood from her hands and staring at Bles. She saw
the long gnarled fingers of the tough little trees and they looked like
the fingers of Elspeth down there beneath the earth pulling against the
boy. Slowly Zora forgot her blood and pain. Who would win--the witch, or
Jason?

Bles looked up and saw the bleeding hands. With a bound he was beside
her.

"Zora!" The cry seemed wrung from his heart by contrition. Why had he
not known--not seen before! "Zora, come right out of this! Sit down here
and rest."

She looked at him unwaveringly; there was no flinching of her spirit.

"I sha'n't do it," she said. "You'se working, and I'se going to work."

"But--Zora--you're not used to such work, and I am. You're tired out."

"So is you," was her reply.

He looked himself over ruefully, and dropping his axe, sat down beside
her on a great log. Silently they contemplated the land; it seemed
indeed a hopeless task. Then they looked at each other in sudden,
unspoken fear of failure.

"If we only had a mule!" he sighed. Immediately her face lighted and her
lips parted, but she said nothing. He presently bounded to his feet.

"Never mind, Zora. To-morrow is Saturday, and I'll work all day. We just
_will_ get it done--sometime." His mouth closed with determination.

"We won't work any more today, then?" cried Zora, her eagerness
betraying itself despite her efforts to hide it.

"_You_ won't," affirmed Bles. "But I've got to do just a little--"

But Zora was adamant: he was tired; she was tired; they would rest.
To-morrow with the rising sun they would begin again.

"There'll be a bright moon tonight," ventured Bles.

"Then I'll come too," Zora announced positively, and he had to promise
for her sake to rest.

They went up the path together and parted diffidently, he watching her
flit away with sorrowful eyes, a little disturbed and puzzled at the
burden he had voluntarily assumed, but never dreaming of drawing back.

Zora did not go far. No sooner did she know herself well out of his
sight than she dropped lightly down beside the path, listening intently
until the last echo of his footsteps had died away. Then, leaving the
cabin on her right, and the scene of their toil on her left, she cut
straight through the swamp, skirted the big road, and in a half-hour
was in the lower meadows of the Cresswell plantations, where the tired
stock was being turned out to graze for the night. Here, in the shadow
of the wood, she lingered. Slowly, but with infinite patience, she broke
one strand after another of the barbed-wire fencing, watching, the
while, the sun grow great and crimson, and die at last in mighty
splendor behind the dimmer westward forests.

The voices of the hands and hostlers grew fainter and thinner in the
distance of purple twilight until the last of them disappeared. Silence
fell, deep and soft; the silence of a day sinking to sleep. Not until
then did Zora steal forth from her hiding-place.

She had chosen her mule long before--a big, black beast, snorting over
his pile of corn,--and gliding up to him, she gathered his supper into
her skirt, found a stout halter, and fed him sparingly as he followed
her. Quickly she unfastened the pieces of the fence, led the animal
through, and spliced them again; and then, with fox-like caution, she
guided her prize through the labyrinthine windings of the swamp. It was
dark and haunting, and ever and again rose lonely night cries. The girl
trembled a little, but plodded resolutely on until the dim silver disk
of the half-moon began to glimmer through the trees. Then she pressed on
more swiftly, and fed more scantily, until finally, with the moonlight
pouring over them at the black lagoon, Zora attempted to drive the
animal into the still waters; but he gave a loud protesting snort and
balked. By subtle temptings she gave him to understand that plenty lay
beyond the dark waters, and quickly swinging herself to his back she
started to ride him up and down along the edge of the lagoon, petting
and whispering to him of good things beyond. Slowly her eyes grew wide;
she seemed to be riding out of dreamland on some hobgoblin beast.

Deeper and deeper they penetrated into the dark waters. Now they entered
the slime; now they stumbled on hidden roots; but deeper and deeper they
waded until at last, turning the animal's head with a jerk, and giving
him a sharp stroke of the whip, she headed straight for the island. A
moment the beast snorted and plunged; higher and higher the black still
waters rose round the girl. They crept up her little limbs, swirled
round her breasts and gleamed green and slimy along her shoulders. A
wild terror gripped her. Maybe she was riding the devil's horse, and
these were the yawning gates of hell, black and sombre beneath the cold,
dead radiance of the moon. She saw again the gnarled and black and
claw-like fingers of Elspeth gripping and dragging her down.

A scream struggled in her breast, her fingers relaxed, and the big
beast, stretching his cramped neck, rose in one mighty plunge and
planted his feet on the sand of the island.

       *       *       *       *       *

Bles, hurrying down in the morning with new tools and new determination,
stopped and stared in blank amazement. Zora was perched in a tree
singing softly and beneath a fat black mule was finishing his breakfast.

"Zora--" he gasped, "how--how did you do it?"

She only smiled and sang a happier measure, pausing only to whisper:

"Dreams--dreams--it's all dreams here, I tells you."

Bles frowned and stood irresolute. The song proceeded with less
assurance, slower and lower, till it stopped, and the singer dropped to
the ground, watching him with wide eyes. He looked down at her, slight,
tired, scratched, but undaunted, striving blindly toward the light with
stanch, unfaltering faith. A pity surged in his heart. He put his arm
about her shoulders and murmured:

"You poor, brave child."

And she shivered with joy.

All day Saturday and part of Sunday they worked feverishly. The trees
crashed and the stumps groaned and crept up into the air, the brambles
blazed and smoked; little frightened animals fled for shelter; and a
wide black patch of rich loam broadened and broadened till it kissed,
on every side but the sheltered east, the black waters of the lagoon.
Late Sunday night the mule again swam the slimy lagoon, and disappeared
toward the Cresswell fields. Then Bles sat down beside Zora, facing the
fields, and gravely took her hand. She looked at him in quick,
breathless fear.

"Zora," he said, "sometimes you tell lies, don't you?"

"Yes," she said slowly; "sometimes."

"And, Zora, sometimes you steal--you stole the pin from Miss Taylor, and
we stole Mr. Cresswell's mule for two days."

"Yes," she said faintly, with a perplexed wrinkle in her brows, "I stole
it."

"Well, Zora, I don't want you ever to tell another lie, or ever to take
anything that doesn't belong to you."

She looked at him silently with the shadow of something like terror far
back in the depths of her deep eyes.

"Always--tell--the truth?" she repeated slowly.

"Yes."

Her fingers worked nervously.

"All the truth?" she asked.

He thought a while.

"No," said he finally, "it is not necessary always to tell all the
truth; but never tell anything that isn't the truth."

"Never?"

"Never."

"Even if it hurts me?"

"Even if it hurts. God is good, He will not let it hurt much."

"He's a fair God, ain't He?" she mused, scanning the evening sky.

"Yes--He's fair, He wouldn't take advantage of a little girl that did
wrong, when she didn't know it was wrong."

Her face lightened and she held his hands in both hers, and said
solemnly as though saying a prayer:

"I won't lie any more, and I won't steal--and--" she looked at him in
startled wistfulness--he remembered it in after years; but he felt he
had preached enough.

"And now for the seed!" he interrupted joyously. "And then--the Silver
Fleece!"

That night, for the first time, Bles entered Zora's home. It was a
single low, black room, smoke-shadowed and dirty, with two dingy beds
and a gaping fire-place. On one side of the fire-place sat the yellow
woman, young, with traces of beauty, holding the white child in her
arms; on the other, hugging the blaze, huddled a formless heap, wreathed
in coils of tobacco smoke--Elspeth, Zora's mother.

Zora said nothing, but glided in and stood in the shadows.

"Good-evening," said Bles cheerily. The woman with the baby alone
responded.

"I came for the seed you promised us--the cotton-seed."

The hag wheeled and approached him swiftly, grasping his shoulders and
twisting her face into his. She was a horrible thing--filthy of breath,
dirty, with dribbling mouth and red eyes. Her few long black teeth hung
loosely like tusks and the folds of fat on her chin curled down on her
great neck. Bles shuddered and stepped back.

"Is you afeared, honey?" she whispered.

"No," he said sturdily.

She chuckled drily. "Yes, you is--everybody's 'feared of old Elspeth;
but she won't hurt you--you's got the spell;" and wheeling again, she
was back at the fire.

"But the seed?" he ventured.

She pointed impressively roofward. "The dark of the moon, boy, the dark
of the moon--the first dark--at midnight." Bles could not wring another
word from her; nor did the ancient witch, by word or look, again give
the slightest indication that she was aware of his presence.

With reluctant farewell, Bles turned home. For a space Zora watched him,
and once she started after him, but came slowly back, and sat by the
fire-place.

Out of the night came voices and laughter, and the sound of wheels and
galloping horses. It was not the soft, rollicking laughter of black men,
but the keener, more metallic sound of white men's cries, and Bles Alwyn
paused at the edge of the wood, looked back and hesitated, but decided
after a moment to go home and to bed.

Zora, however, leapt to her feet and fled into the night, while the hag
screamed after her and cursed. There was tramping of feet on the cabin
floor, and loud voices and singing and cursing.

"Where's Zora?" some one yelled, with an oath. "Damn it! where is she? I
haven't seen her for a year, you old devil."

The hag whimpered and snarled. Far down in the field of the Fleece, Zora
lay curled beneath a tall dark tree asleep. All night there was coming
and going in the cabin; the talk and laughter grew loud and boisterous,
and the red fire glared in the night.

       *       *       *       *       *

The days flew by and the moon darkened. In the swamp, the hidden island
lay spaded and bedded, and Bles was throwing up a dyke around the edge;
Zora helped him until he came to the black oak at the western edge. It
was a large twisted thing with one low flying limb that curled out
across another tree and made a mighty seat above the waters.

"Don't throw the dirt too high there," she begged; "it'll bring my seat
too near the earth."

He looked up.

"Why, it's a throne," he laughed.

"It needs a roof," he whimsically told her when his day's work was done.
Deftly twisting and intertwining the branches of tree and bush, he wove
a canopy of living green that shadowed the curious nest and warded it
snugly from wind and water.

Early next morning Bles slipped down and improved the nest; adding
foot-rests to make the climbing easy, peep-holes east and west, a bit
of carpet over the bark, and on the rough main trunk, a little picture
in blue and gold of Bougereau's Madonna. Zora sat hidden and alone in
silent ecstasy. Bles peeped in--there was not room to enter: the girl
was staring silently at the Madonna. She seemed to feel rather than hear
his presence, and she inquired softly:

"Who's it, Bles?"

"The mother of God," he answered reverently.

"And why does she hold a lily?"

"It stands for purity--she was a good woman."

"With a baby," Zora added slowly.

"Yes--" said Bles, and then more quickly--"It is the Christ Child--God's
baby."

"God is the father of all the little babies, ain't He, Bles?"

"Why, yes--yes, of course; only this little baby didn't have any other
father."

"Yes, I know one like that," she said,--and then she added softly: "Poor
little Christ-baby."

Bles hesitated, and before he found words Zora was saying:

"How white she is; she's as white as the lily, Bles; but--I'm sorry
she's white--Bles, what's purity--just whiteness?"

Bles glanced at her awkwardly but she was still staring wide-eyed at the
picture, and her voice was earnest. She was now so old and again so much
a child, an eager questioning child, that there seemed about her
innocence something holy.

"It means," he stammered, groping for meanings--"it means being
good--just as good as a woman knows how."

She wheeled quickly toward him and asked him eagerly:

"Not better--not better than she knows, but just as good, in--lying and
stealing and--and everything?"

Bles smiled.

"No--not better than she knows, but just as good."

She trembled happily.

"I'm--pure," she said, with a strange little breaking voice and
gesture. A sob struggled in his throat.

"Of course you are," he whispered tenderly, hiding her little hands in
his.

"I--I was so afraid--sometimes--that I wasn't," she whispered, lifting
up to him her eyes streaming with tears. Silently he kissed her lips.

From that day on they walked together in a new world. No revealing word
was spoken; no vows were given, none asked for; but a new bond held
them. She grew older, quieter, taller, he humbler, more tender and
reverent, as they toiled together.

So the days passed. The sun burned in the heavens; but the silvered
glory of the moon grew fainter and fainter and each night it rose later
than the night before. Then one day Zora whispered:

"Tonight!"

Bles came to the cabin, and he and Zora and Elspeth sat silently around
the fire-place with its meagre embers. The night was balmy and still;
only occasionally a wandering breeze searching the hidden places of the
swamp, or the call and song of night birds, jarred the stillness. Long
they sat, until the silence crept into Bles's flesh, and stretching out
his hand, he touched Zora's, clasping it.

After a time the old woman rose and hobbled to a big black chest. Out of
it she brought an old bag of cotton seed--not the white-green seed which
Bles had always known, but small, smooth black seeds, which she handled
carefully, dipping her hands deep down and letting them drop through her
gnarled fingers. And so again they sat and waited and waited, saying no
word.

Not until the stars of midnight had swung to the zenith did they start
down through the swamp. Bles sought to guide the old woman, but he found
she knew the way better than he did. Her shadowy figure darting in and
out among the trunks till they crossed the tree bridge, moved ever
noiselessly ahead.

She motioned the boy and girl away to the thicket at the edge, and
stood still and black in the midst of the cleared island. Bles slipped
his arm protectingly around Zora, glancing fearfully about in the
darkness. Slowly a great cry rose and swept the island. It struck madly
and sharply, and then died away to uneasy murmuring. From afar there
seemed to come the echo or the answer to the call. The form of Elspeth
blurred the night dimly far off, almost disappearing, and then growing
blacker and larger. They heard the whispering "_swish-swish_" of falling
seed; they felt the heavy tread of a great coming body. The form of the
old woman suddenly loomed black above them, hovering a moment formless
and vast then fading again away, and the "_swish-swish_" of the falling
seed alone rose in the silence of the night.

At last all was still. A long silence. Then again the air seemed
suddenly filled with that great and awful cry; its echoing answer
screamed afar and they heard the raucous voice of Elspeth beating in
their ears:

_"De seed done sowed! De seed done sowed!"_




_Ten_

MR. TAYLOR CALLS


"Thinking the matter over," said Harry Cresswell to his father, "I'm
inclined to advise drawing this Taylor out a little further."

The Colonel puffed his cigar and one eye twinkled, the lid of the other
being at the moment suggestively lowered.

"Was she pretty?" he asked; but his son ignored the remark, and the
father continued:

"I had a telegram from Taylor this morning, after you left. He'll be
passing through Montgomery the first of next month, and proposes
calling."

"I'll wire him to come," said Harry, promptly.

At this juncture the door opened and a young lady entered. Helen
Cresswell was twenty, small and pretty, with a slightly languid air.
Outside herself there was little in which she took very great interest,
and her interest in herself was not absorbing. Yet she had a curiously
sweet way. Her servants liked her and the tenants could count on her
spasmodic attentions in time of sickness and trouble.

"Good-morning," she said, with a soft drawl. She sauntered over to her
father, kissed him, and hung over the back of his chair.

"Did you get that novel for me, Harry?"--expectantly regarding her
brother.

"I forgot it, Sis. But I'll be going to town again soon."

The young lady showed that she was annoyed.

"By the bye, Sis, there's a young lady over at the Negro school whom I
think you'd like."

"Black or white?"

"A young lady, I said. Don't be sarcastic."

"I heard you. I did not know whether you were using our language or
others'."

"She's really unusual, and seems to understand things. She's planning to
call some day--shall you be at home?"

"Certainly not, Harry; you're crazy." And she strolled out to the porch,
exchanged some remarks with a passing servant, and then nestled
comfortably into a hammock. She helped herself to a chocolate and called
out musically:

"Pa, are you going to town today?"

"Yes, honey."

"Can I go?"

"I'm going in an hour or so, and business at the bank will keep me until
after lunch."

"I don't care, I just must go. I'm clean out of anything to read. And I
want to shop and call on Dolly's friend--she's going soon."

"All right. Can you be ready by eleven?"

She considered.

"Yes--I reckon," she drawled, prettily swinging her foot and watching
the tree-tops above the distant swamp.

Harry Cresswell, left alone, rang the bell for the butler.

"Still thinking of going, are you, Sam?" asked Cresswell, carelessly,
when the servant appeared. He was a young, light-brown boy, his manner
obsequious.

"Why, yes, sir--if you can spare me."

"Spare you, you black rascal! You're going anyhow. Well, you'll repent
it; the North is no place for niggers. See here, I want lunch for two at
one o'clock." The directions that followed were explicit and given with
a particularity that made Sam wonder. "Order my trap," he finally
directed.

Cresswell went out on the high-pillared porch until the trap appeared.

"Oh, Harry! I wanted to go in the trap--take me?" coaxed his sister.

"Sorry, Sis, but I'm going the other way."

"I don't believe it," said Miss Cresswell, easily, as she settled down
to another chocolate. Cresswell did not take the trouble to reply.

Miss Taylor was on her morning walk when she saw him spinning down the
road, and both expressed surprise and pleasure at the meeting.

"What a delightful morning!" said the school-teacher, and the glow on
her face said even more.

"I'm driving round through the old plantation," he explained; "won't you
join me?"

"The invitation is tempting," she hesitated; "but I've got just oodles
of work."

"What! on Saturday?"

"Saturday is my really busy day, don't you know. I guess I could get
off; really, though, I suspect I ought to tell Miss Smith."

He looked a little perplexed; but the direction in which her
inclinations lay was quite clear to him.

"It--it would be decidedly the proper thing," he murmured, "and we
could, of course, invite Miss--"

She saw the difficulty and interrupted him:

"It's quite unnecessary; she'll think I have simply gone for a long
walk." And soon they were speeding down the silent road, breathing the
perfume of the pines.

Now a ride of an early spring morning, in Alabama, over a leisurely old
plantation road and behind a spirited horse, is an event to be enjoyed.
Add to this a man bred to be agreeable and outdoing his training, and a
pretty girl gay with new-found companionship--all this is apt to make a
morning worth remembering.

They turned off the highway and passed through long stretches of
ploughed and tumbled fields, and other fields brown with the dead ghosts
of past years' cotton standing straggling and weather-worn. Long,
straight, or curling rows of ploughers passed by with steaming,
struggling mules, with whips snapping and the yodle of workers or the
sharp guttural growl of overseers as a constant accompaniment.

"They're beginning to plough up the land for the cotton-crop," he
explained.

"What a wonderful crop it is!" Mary had fallen pensive.

"Yes, indeed--if only we could get decent returns for it."

"Why, I thought it was a most valuable crop." She turned to him
inquiringly.

"It is--to Negroes and manufacturers, but not to planters."

"But why don't the planters do something?"

"What can be done with Negroes?" His tone was bitter. "We tried to
combine against manufacturers in the Farmers' League of last winter. My
father was president. The pastime cost him fifty thousand dollars."

Miss Taylor was perplexed, but eager. "You must correspond with my
brother, Mr. Cresswell," she gravely observed. "I'm sure he--" Before
she could finish, an overseer rode up. He began talking abruptly, with a
quick side-glance at Mary, in which she might have caught a gleam of
surprised curiosity.

"That old nigger, Jim Sykes, over on the lower place, sir, ain't showed
up again this morning."

Cresswell nodded. "I'll drive by and see," he said carelessly.

The old man was discovered sitting before his cabin with his head in
his hands. He was tall, black, and gaunt, partly bald, with tufted hair.
One leg was swathed in rags, and his eyes, as he raised them, wore a
cowed and furtive look.

"Well, Uncle Jim, why aren't you at work?" called Cresswell from the
roadside. The old man rose painfully to his feet, swayed against the
cabin, and clutched off his cap.

"It's my leg again, Master Harry--the leg what I hurt in the gin last
fall," he answered, uneasily.

Cresswell frowned. "It's probably whiskey," he assured his companion, in
an undertone; then to the man:

"You must get to the field to-morrow,"--his habitually calm, unfeeling
positiveness left no ground for objection; "I cannot support you in
idleness, you know."

"Yes, Master Harry," the other returned, with conciliatory eagerness; "I
knows that--I knows it and I ain't shirking. But, Master Harry, they
ain't doing me right 'bout my cabin--I just wants to show you." He got
out some dirty papers, and started to hobble forward, wincing with pain.
Mary Taylor stirred in her seat under an involuntary impulse to help,
but Cresswell touched the horse.

"All right, Uncle Jim," he said; "we'll look it over to-morrow."

They turned presently to where they could see the Cresswell oaks waving
lazily in the sunlight and the white gleam of the pillared "Big House."

A pause at the Cresswell store, where Mr. Cresswell entered, afforded
Mary Taylor an opportunity further to extend her fund of information.

"Do you go to school?" she inquired of the black boy who held the horse,
her mien sympathetic and interested.

"No, ma'am," he mumbled.

"What's your name?"

"Buddy--I'se one of Aunt Rachel's chilluns."

"And where do you live, Buddy?"

"I lives with granny, on de upper place."

"Well, I'll see Aunt Rachel and ask her to send you to school."

"Won't do no good--she done ast, and Mr. Cresswell, he say he ain't
going to have no more of his niggers--"

But Mr. Cresswell came out just then, and with him a big, fat, and
greasy black man, with little eyes and soft wheedling voice. He was
following Cresswell at the side but just a little behind, hat in hand,
head aslant, and talking deferentially. Cresswell strode carelessly on,
answering him with good-natured tolerance.

The black man stopped with humility before the trap and swept a profound
obeisance. Cresswell glanced up quizzically at Miss Taylor.

"This," he announced, "is Jones, the Baptist preacher--begging."

"Ah, lady,"--in mellow, unctuous tones--"I don't know what we poor black
folks would do without Mr. Cresswell--the Lord bless him," said the
minister, shoving his hand far down into his pocket.

Shortly afterward they were approaching the Cresswell Mansion, when the
young man reined in the horse.

"If you wouldn't mind," he suggested, "I could introduce my sister to
you."

"I should be delighted," answered Miss Taylor, readily.

When they rolled up to the homestead under its famous oaks the hour was
past one. The house was a white oblong building of two stories. In front
was the high pillared porch, semi-circular, extending to the roof with a
balcony in the second story. On the right was a broad verandah looking
toward a wide lawn, with the main road and the red swamp in the
distance.

The butler met them, all obeisance.

"Ask Miss Helen to come down," said Mr. Cresswell.

Sam glanced at him.

"Miss Helen will be dreadful sorry, but she and the Colonel have just
gone to town--I believe her Aunty ain't well."

Mr. Cresswell looked annoyed.

"Well, well! that's too bad," he said. "But at any rate, have a seat a
moment out here on the verandah, Miss Taylor. And, Sam, can't you find
us a sandwich and something cool? I could not be so inhospitable as to
send you away hungry at this time of day."

Miss Taylor sat down in a comfortable low chair facing the refreshing
breeze, and feasted her eyes on the scene. Oh, this was life: a smooth
green lawn, and beds of flowers, a vista of brown fields, and the dark
line of wood beyond. The deft, quiet butler brought out a little table,
spread with the whitest of cloths and laid with the brightest of silver,
and "found" a dainty lunch. There was a bit of fried chicken breast,
some crisp bacon, browned potatoes, little round beaten biscuit, and
rose-colored sherbet with a whiff of wine in it. Miss Taylor wondered a
little at the bounty of Southern hospitality; but she was hungry, and
she ate heartily, then leaned back dreamily and listened to Mr.
Cresswell's smooth Southern _r_'s, adding a word here and there that
kept the conversation going and brought a grave smile to his pale lips.
At last with a sigh she arose to her feet.

"I must go! What shall I tell Miss Smith! No, no--no carriage; I must
walk." Of course, however, she could not refuse to let him go at least
half-way, ostensibly to tell her of the coming of her brother. He
expressed again his disappointment at his sister's absence.

Somewhat to Miss Taylor's surprise Miss Smith said nothing until they
were parting for the night, then she asked:

"Was Miss Cresswell at home?"

Mary reddened.

"She had been called suddenly to town."

"Well, my dear, I wouldn't do it again."

The girl was angry.

"I'm not a school-girl, but a grown woman, and capable of caring for
myself. Moreover, in matter of propriety I do not think you have usually
found my ideas too lax--rather the opposite."

"There, there, dear; don't be angry. Only I think if your brother
knew--"

"He will know in a very few weeks; he is coming to visit the
Cresswells." And Miss Taylor sailed triumphantly up the stairs.

But John Taylor was not the man to wait weeks when a purpose could be
accomplished in days or hours. No sooner was Harry Cresswell's telegram
at hand than he hastened back from Savannah, struck across country, and
the week after his sister's ride found him striding up the carriage-way
of the Cresswell home.

John Taylor had prospered since summer. The cotton manufacturers'
combine was all but a fact; Mr. Easterly had discovered that his chief
clerk's sense and executive ability were invaluable, and John Taylor was
slated for a salary in five figures when things should be finally
settled, not to mention a generous slice of stock--watery at present,
but warranted to ripen early.

While Mr. Easterly still regarded Taylor's larger trust as chimerical,
some occurrences of the fall made him take a respectful attitude toward
it. Just as the final clauses of the combine agreement were to be
signed, there appeared a shortage in the cotton-crop, and prices began
to soar. The cause was obviously the unexpected success of the new
Farmers' League among the cotton-growers. Mr. Easterly found it
comparatively easy to overthrow the corner, but the flurry made some of
the manufacturers timid, and the trust agreement was postponed until a
year later. This experience and the persistence of Mr. Taylor induced
Mr. Easterly to take a step toward the larger project: he let in some
eager outside capital to the safer manufacturing scheme, and withdrew a
corresponding amount of Mrs. Grey's money. This he put into John
Taylor's hands to invest in the South in bank stock and industries with
the idea of playing a part in the financial situation there.

"It's a risk, Taylor, of course, and we'll let the old lady take the
risk. At the worst it's safer than the damned foolishness she has in
mind."

So it happened that John Taylor went South to look after large
investments and, as Mr. Easterly expressed it, "to bring back facts,
not dreams." His investment matters went quickly and well, and now he
turned to his wider and bigger scheme. He wrote the Cresswells
tentatively, expecting no reply, or an evasive one; planning to circle
around them, drawing his nets closer, and trying them again later. To
his surprise they responded quickly.

"Humph! Hard pressed," he decided, and hurried to them.

So it was the week after Mary Taylor's ride that found him at
Cresswell's front door, thin, eagle-eyed, fairly well dressed and
radiating confidence.

"John Taylor," he announced to Sam, jerkily, thrusting out a card. "Want
to see Mr. Cresswell; soon as possible."

Sam made him wait a half-hour, for the sake of discipline, and then
brought father and son.

"Good-morning, Mr. Cresswell, and Mr. Cresswell again," said Mr. Taylor,
helping himself to a straight-backed chair. "Hope you'll pardon this
unexpected visit. Found myself called through Montgomery, just after I
got your wire; thought I'd better drop over."

At Harry's suggestion they moved to the verandah and sat down over
whiskey and soda, which Taylor refused, and plunged into the subject
without preliminaries.

"I'm assuming that you gentlemen are in the cotton business for making
money. So am I. I see a way in which you and your friends can help me
and mine, and clear up more millions than all of us can spend; for this
reason I've hunted you up. This is my scheme.

"See here; there are a thousand cotton-mills in this country, half of
them in the South, one-fourth in New England, and one-fourth in the
Middle States. They are capitalized at six hundred million dollars. Now
let me tell you: we control three hundred and fifty millions of that
capitalization. The trust is going through capitalization at a billion.
The only thing that threatens it is child-labor legislation in the
South, the tariff, and the control of the supply of cotton. Pretty big
hindrances, you say. That's so, but look here: we've got the stock so
placed that nothing short of a popular upheaval can send any Child Labor
bill through Congress in six years. See? After that we don't care. Same
thing applies to the tariff. The last bill ran ten years. The present
bill will last longer, or I lose my guess--'specially if Smith is in the
Senate.

"Well, then, there remains raw cotton. The connection of cotton-raising
and its raw material is too close to risk a manufacturing trust that
does not include practical control of the raw material. For that reason
we're planning a trust to include the raising and manufacturing of
cotton in America. Then, too, cornering the cotton market here means the
whip-hand of the industrial world. Gentlemen, it's the biggest idea of
the century. It beats steel."

Colonel Cresswell chuckled.

"How do you spell that?" he asked.

But John Taylor was not to be diverted; his thin face was pale, but his
gray eyes burned with the fire of a zealot. Harry Cresswell only smiled
dimly and looked interested.

"Now, again," continued John Taylor. "There are a million cotton farms
in the South, half run by colored people and half by whites. Leave the
colored out of account as long as they are disfranchised. The half
million white farms are owned or controlled by five thousand wholesale
merchants and three thousand big landowners, of whom you, Colonel
Cresswell, are among the biggest with your fifty thousand acres. Ten
banks control these eight thousand people--one of these is the Jefferson
National of Montgomery, of which you are a silent director."

Colonel Cresswell started; this man evidently had inside information.
Did he know of the mortgage, too?

"Don't be alarmed. I'm safe," Taylor assured him. "Now, then, if we can
get the banks, wholesale merchants, and biggest planters into line we
can control the cotton crop."

"But," objected Harry Cresswell, "while the banks and the large
merchants may be possibilities, do you know what it means to try to get
planters into line?"

"Yes, I do. And what I don't know you and your father do. Colonel
Cresswell is president of the Farmers' League. That's the reason I'm
here. Your success last year made you indispensable to our plans."

"Our success?" laughed Colonel Cresswell, ruefully, thinking of the
fifty thousand dollars lost and the mortgage to cover it.

"Yes, sir--success! You didn't know it; we were too careful to allow
that; and I say frankly you wouldn't know it now if we weren't convinced
you were too far involved and the League too discouraged to repeat the
dose."

"Now, look here, sir," began Colonel Cresswell, flushing and drawing
himself erect.

"There, there, Colonel Cresswell, don't misunderstand me. I'm a plain
man. I'm playing a big game--a tremendous one. I need you, and I know
you need me. I find out about you, and my sources of knowledge are wide
and unerring. But the knowledge is safe, sir; it's buried. Last year
when you people curtailed cotton acreage and warehoused a big chunk of
the crop you gave the mill men the scare of their lives. We had a hasty
conference and the result was that the bottom fell out of your credit."

Colonel Cresswell grew pale. There was a disquieting, relentless element
in this unimpassioned man's tone.

"You failed," pursued John Taylor, "because you couldn't get the banks
and the big merchants behind you. We've got 'em behind us--with big
chunks of stock and a signed iron-clad agreement. You can wheel the
planters into line--will you do it?" John Taylor bent forward tense but
cool and steel-like. Harry Cresswell laid his hand on his father's arm
and said quietly:

"And where do we come in?"

"That's business," affirmed John Taylor. "You and two hundred and fifty
of the biggest planters come in on the ground-floor of the
two-billion-dollar All-Cotton combine. It can easily mean two million
to you in five years."

"And the other planters?"

"They come in for high-priced cotton until we get our grip."

"And then?"

The quiet question seemed to invoke a vision for John Taylor; the gray
eyes took on the faraway look of a seer; the thin, bloodless lips formed
a smile in which there was nothing pleasant.

"They keep their mouths shut or we squeeze 'em and buy the land. We
propose to own the cotton belt of the South."

Colonel Cresswell started indignantly from his seat.

"Do you think--by God, sir!--that I'd betray Southern gentlemen to--"

But Harry's hand and impassive manner restrained him; he cooled as
suddenly as he had flared up.

"Thank you very much, Mr. Taylor," he concluded; "we'll consider this
matter carefully. You'll spend the night, of course."

"Can't possibly--must catch that next train back."

"But we must talk further," the Colonel insisted. "And then, there's
your sister."

"By Jove! Forgot all about Mary." John Taylor after a little desultory
talk, followed his host up-stairs.

The next afternoon John Taylor was sitting beside Helen Cresswell on the
porch which overlooked the terrace, and was, on the whole, thinking less
of cotton than he had for several years. To be sure, he was talking
cotton; but he was doing it mechanically and from long habit, and was
really thinking how charming a girl Helen Cresswell was. She fascinated
him. For his sister Taylor had a feeling of superiority that was almost
contempt. The idea of a woman trying to understand and argue about
things men knew! He admired the dashing and handsome Miss Easterly, but
she scared him and made him angrily awkward. This girl, on the other
hand, just lounged and listened with an amused smile, or asked the most
child-like questions. She required him to wait on her quite as a matter
of course--to adjust her pillows, hand her the bon-bons, and hunt for
her lost fan. Mr. Taylor, who had not waited on anybody since his mother
died, and not much before, found a quite inexplicable pleasure in these
little domesticities. Several times he took out his watch and frowned;
yet he managed to stay with her quite happily.

On her part Miss Cresswell was vastly amused. Her acquaintance with men
was not wide, but it was thorough so far as her own class was concerned.
They were all well-dressed and leisurely, fairly good looking, and they
said the same words and did the same things in the same way. They paid
her compliments which she did not believe, and they did not expect her
to believe. They were charmingly deferential in the matter of dropped
handkerchiefs, but tyrannical of opinion. They were thoughtful about
candy and flowers, but thoughtless about feelings and income. Altogether
they were delightful, but cloying. This man was startlingly different;
ungainly and always in a desperate, unaccountable hurry. He knew no
pretty speeches, he certainly did not measure up to her standard of
breeding, and yet somehow he was a gentleman. All this was new to Helen
Cresswell, and she liked it.

Meanwhile the men above-stairs lingered in the Colonel's office--the
older one perturbed and sputtering, the younger insistent and
imperturbable.

"The fact is, father," he was saying, "as you yourself have said, one
bad crop of cotton would almost ruin us."

"But the prospects are good."

"What are prospects in March? No, father, this is the situation--three
good crops in succession will wipe off our indebtedness and leave us
facing only low prices and a scarcity of niggers; on the other hand--"
The father interrupted impatiently.

"Yes, on the other hand, if we plunge deeper in debt and betray our
friends we may come out millionaires or--paupers."

"Precisely," said Harry Cresswell, calmly. "Now, our plan is to take no
chances; I propose going North and looking into this matter thoroughly.
If he represents money and has money, and if the trust has really got
the grip he says it has, why, it's a case of crush or get crushed, and
we'll have to join them on their own terms. If he's bluffing, or the
thing looks weak, we'll wait."

It all ended as matters usually did end, in Harry's having his way. He
came downstairs, expecting, indeed, rather hoping, to find Taylor
impatiently striding to and fro, watch in hand; but here he was,
ungainly, it might be, but quite docile, drawing the picture of a
power-loom for Miss Cresswell, who seemed really interested. Harry
silently surveyed them from the door, and his face lighted with a new
thought.

Taylor, espying him, leapt to his feet and hauled out his watch.

"Well--I--" he began lamely.

"No, you weren't either," interrupted Harry, with a laugh that was
unmistakably cordial and friendly. "You had quite forgotten what you
were waiting for--isn't that so, Sis?"

Helen regarded her brother through her veiling lashes: what meant this
sudden assumption of warmth and amiability?

"No, indeed; he was raging with impatience," she returned.

"Why, Miss Cresswell, I--I--" John Taylor forsook social amenities and
pulled himself together. "Well," shortly, "now for that talk--ready?"
And quite forgetting Miss Cresswell, he bolted into the parlor.

"The decision we have come to is this," said Harry Cresswell. "We are in
debt, as you know."

"Forty-nine thousand, seven hundred and forty-two dollars and twelve
cents," responded Taylor; "in three notes, due in twelve, twenty-four,
and thirty-six months, interest at eight per cent, held by--"

The Colonel snorted his amazement, and Harry Cresswell cut in:

"Yes," he calmly admitted; "and with good crops for three years we'd be
all right; good crops even for two years would leave us fairly well
off."

"You mean it would relieve you of the present stringency and put you
face to face with the falling price of cotton and rising wages," was
John Taylor's dry addendum.

"Rising price of cotton, you mean," Harry corrected.

"Oh, temporarily," John Taylor admitted.

"Precisely, and thus postpone the decision."

"No, Mr. Cresswell. I'm offering to let you in on the ground
floor--_now_--not next year, or year after."

"Mr. Taylor, have you any money in this?"

"Everything I've got."

"Well, the thing is this way: if you can prove to us that conditions are
as you say, we're in for it."

"Good! Meet me in New York, say--let's see, this is March tenth--well,
May third."

Young Cresswell was thinking rapidly. This man without doubt represented
money. He was anxious for an alliance. Why? Was it all straight, or did
the whole move conceal a trick?

His eyes strayed to the porch where his pretty sister sat languidly, and
then toward the school where the other sister lived. John Taylor looked
out on the porch, too. They glanced quickly at each other, and each
wondered if the other had shared his thought. Harry Cresswell did not
voice his mind for he was not wholly disposed to welcome what was there;
but he could not refrain from saying in tones almost confidential:

"You could recommend this deal, then, could you--to your own friends?"

"To my own family," asserted John Taylor, looking at Harry Cresswell
with sudden interest. But Mr. Cresswell was staring at the end of his
cigar.




_Eleven_

THE FLOWERING OF THE FLEECE


"Zora," observed Miss Smith, "it's a great blessing not to need
spectacles, isn't it?"

Zora thought that it was; but she was wondering just what spectacles had
to do with the complaint she had brought to the office from Miss Taylor.

"I'm always losing my glasses and they get dirty and--Oh, dear! now
where is that paper?"

Zora pointed silently to the complaint.

"No, not that--another paper. It must be in my room. Don't you want to
come up and help me look?"

They went up to the clean, bare room, with its white iron bed, its cool,
spotless shades and shining windows. Zora walked about softly and
looked, while Miss Smith quietly searched on desk and bureau, paying no
attention to the girl. For the time being she was silent.

"I sometimes wish," she began at length, "I had a bright-eyed girl like
you to help me find and place things."

Zora made no comment.

"Sometimes Bles helps me," added Miss Smith, guilefully.

Zora looked sharply at her. "Could I help?" she asked, almost timidly.

"Why, I don't know,"--the answer was deliberate. "There are one or two
little things perhaps--"

Placing a hand gently upon Zora's shoulder, she pointed out a few odd
tasks, and left the girl busily doing them; then she returned to the
office, and threw Miss Taylor's complaint into the waste-basket.

For a week or more Zora slipped in every day and performed the little
tasks that Miss Smith laid out: she sorted papers, dusted the bureau,
hung a curtain; she did not do the things very well, and she broke some
china, but she worked earnestly and quickly, and there was no thought of
pay. Then, too, did not Bles praise her with a happy smile, as together,
day after day, they stood and watched the black dirt where the Silver
Fleece lay planted? She dreamed and sang over that dark field, and again
and again appealed to him: "S'pose it shouldn't come up after all?" And
he would laugh and say that of course it would come up.

One day, when Zora was helping Miss Smith in the bedroom, she paused
with her arms full of clothes fresh from the laundry.

"Where shall I put these?"

Miss Smith looked around. "They might go in there," she said, pointing
to a door. Zora opened it. A tiny bedroom was disclosed, with one broad
window looking toward the swamp; white curtains adorned it, and white
hangings draped the plain bureau and wash-stand and the little bed.
There was a study table, and a small bookshelf holding a few books, all
simple and clean. Zora paused uncertainly, and surveyed the room.

"Sometimes when you're tired and want to be alone you can come up here,
Zora," said Miss Smith carelessly. "No one uses this room."

Zora caught her breath sharply, but said nothing. The next day Miss
Smith said to her when she came in:

"I'm busy now, dear, but you go up to your little room and read and I'll
call."

Zora quietly obeyed. An hour later Miss Smith looked in, then she closed
the door lightly and left. Another hour flew by before Zora hurried
down.

"I was reading, and I forgot," she said.

"It's all right," returned Miss Smith. "I didn't need you. And any day,
after you get all your lessons, I think Miss Taylor will excuse you and
let you go to your room and read." Miss Taylor, it transpired, was more
than glad.

Day after day Bles and Zora visited the field; but ever the ground lay
an unrelieved black beneath the bright sun, and they would go
reluctantly home again, today there was much work to be done, and Zora
labored steadily and eagerly, never pausing, and gaining in deftness and
care.

In the afternoon Bles went to town with the school wagon. A light shower
flew up from the south, lingered a while and fled, leaving a fragrance
in the air. For a moment Zora paused, and her nostrils quivered; then
without a word she slipped down-stairs, glided into the swamp, and sped
away to the island. She swung across the tree and a low, delighted cry
bubbled on her lips. All the rich, black ground was sprinkled with
tender green. She bent above the verdant tenderness and kissed it; then
she rushed back, bursting into the room.

"_It's come! It's come!--the Silver Fleece!_"

Miss Smith was startled.

"The Silver Fleece!" she echoed in bewilderment.

Zora hesitated. It came over her all at once that this one great
all-absorbing thing meant nothing to the gaunt tired-look woman before
her.

"Would Bles care if I told?" she asked doubtfully.

"No," Miss Smith ventured.

And then the girl crouched at her feet and told the dream and the
story. Many factors were involved that were quite foreign to the older
woman's nature and training. The recital brought to her New England mind
many questions of policy and propriety. And yet, as she looked down upon
the dark face, hot with enthusiasm, it all seemed somehow more than
right. Slowly and lightly Miss Smith slipped her arm about Zora, and
nodded and smiled a perfect understanding. They looked out together into
the darkening twilight.

"It is so late and wet and you're tired tonight--don't you think you'd
better sleep in your little room?"

Zora sat still. She thought of the noisy flaming cabin and the dark
swamp; but a contrasting thought of the white bed made her timid, and
slowly she shook her head. Nevertheless Miss Smith led her to the room.

"Here are things for you to wear," she pointed out, opening the bureau,
"and here is the bath-room." She left the girl standing in the middle of
the floor.

In time Zora came to stay often at Miss Smith's cottage, and to learn
new and unknown ways of living and dressing. She still refused to board,
for that would cost more than she could pay yet, and she would accept no
charity. Gradually an undemonstrative friendship sprang up between the
pale old gray-haired teacher and the dark young black-haired girl.
Delicately, too, but gradually, the companionship of Bles and Zora was
guided and regulated. Of mornings Zora would hurry through her lessons
and get excused to fly to the swamp, to work and dream alone. At noon
Bles would run down, and they would linger until he must hurry back to
dinner. After school he would go again, working while she was busy in
Miss Smith's office, and returning later, would linger awhile to tell
Zora of his day while she busied herself with her little tasks. Saturday
mornings they would go to the swamp and work together, and sometimes
Miss Smith, stealing away from curious eyes, would come and sit and talk
with them as they toiled.

In those days, for these two souls, earth came very near to heaven.
Both were in the midst of that mighty change from youth to womanhood and
manhood. Their manner toward each other by degrees grew shyer and more
thoughtful. There was less of comradeship, but the little meant more.
The rough good fellowship was silently put aside; they no longer lightly
clasped hands; and each at times wondered, in painful
self-consciousness, if the other cared.

Then began, too, that long and subtle change wherein a soul, until now
unmindful of its wrappings, comes suddenly to consciousness of body and
clothes; when it gropes and tries to adjust one with the other, and
through them to give to the inner deeper self, finer and fuller
expression. One saw it easily, almost suddenly, in Alwyn's Sunday suit,
vivid neckties, and awkward fads.

Slower, subtler, but more striking was the change in Zora, as she began
to earn bits of pin money in the office and to learn to sew. Dresses
hung straighter; belts served a better purpose; stockings were smoother;
underwear was daintier. Then her hair--that great dark mass of immovable
infinitely curled hair--began to be subdued and twisted and combed
until, with steady pains and study, it lay in thick twisted braids about
her velvet forehead, like some shadowed halo. All this came much more
slowly and spasmodically than one tells it. Few noticed the change much;
none noticed all; and yet there came a night--a student's social--when
with a certain suddenness the whole school, teachers and pupils,
realized the newness of the girl, and even Bles was startled.

He had bought her in town, at Christmas time, a pair of white satin
slippers, partly to test the smallness of her feet on which in younger
days he had rallied her, and partly because she had mentioned a possible
white dress. They were a cheap, plain pair but dainty, and they fitted
well.

When the evening came and the students were marching and the teachers,
save Miss Smith, were sitting rather primly apart and commenting, she
entered the room. She was a little late, and a hush greeted her. One
boy, with the inimitable drawl of the race, pushed back his ice-cream
and addressed it with a mournful head-shake:

"Go way, honey, yo' los' yo' tas'e!"

The dress was plain and fitted every curving of a healthy girlish form.
She paused a moment white-bodied and white-limbed but dark and
velvet-armed, her full neck and oval head rising rich and almost black
above, with its deep-lighted eyes and crown of silent darkling hair.

To some, such a revelation of grace and womanliness in this hoyden, the
gentle swelling of lankness to beauty, of lowliness to shy self-poise,
was a sudden joy, to others a mere blindness. Mary Taylor was perplexed
and in some indefinite way amazed; and many of the other teachers saw no
beauty, only a strangeness that brought a smile. They were such as know
beauty by convention only, and find it lip-ringed, hoop-skirted,
tattooed, or corsetted, as time and place decree.

The change in Zora, however, had been neither cataclysmic nor
revolutionary and it was yet far--very far--from complete. She still ran
and romped in the woods, and dreamed her dreams; she still was
passionately independent and "queer." Tendencies merely had become
manifest, some dominant. She would, unhindered, develop to a brilliant,
sumptuous womanhood; proud, conquering, full-blooded, and deep
bosomed--a passionate mother of men. Herein lay all her early wildness
and strangeness. Herein lay, as yet half hidden, dimly sensed and all
unspoken, the power of a mighty all-compelling love for one human soul,
and, through it, for all the souls of men. All this lay growing and
developing; but as yet she was still a girl, with a new shyness and
comeliness and a bold, searching heart.

In the field of the Silver Fleece all her possibilities were beginning
to find expression. These new-born green things hidden far down in the
swamp, begotten in want and mystery, were to her a living wonderful
fairy tale come true. All the latent mother in her brooded over them;
all her brilliant fancy wove itself about them. They were her
dream-children, and she tended them jealously; they were her Hope, and
she worshipped them. When the rabbits tried the tender plants she
watched hours to drive them off, and catching now and then a pulsing
pink-eyed invader, she talked to it earnestly:

"Brer Rabbit--poor little Brer Rabbit, don't you know you mustn't eat
Zora's cotton? Naughty, naughty Brer Rabbit." And then she would show it
where she had gathered piles of fragrant weeds for it and its fellows.

The golden green of the first leaves darkened, and the plants sprang
forward steadily. Never before was such a magnificent beginning, a full
month ahead of other cotton. The rain swept down in laughing, bubbling
showers, and laved their thirsty souls, and Zora held her beating breast
day by day lest it rain too long or too heavily. The sun burned fiercely
upon the young cotton plants as the spring hastened, and they lifted
their heads in darker, wilder luxuriance; for the time of hoeing was at
hand.

These days were days of alternate hope and doubt with Bles Alwyn.
Strength and ambition and inarticulate love were fighting within him. He
felt, in the dark thousands of his kind about him, a mighty calling to
deeds. He was becoming conscious of the narrowness and straightness of
his black world, and red anger flashed in him ever and again as he felt
his bonds. His mental horizon was broadening as he prepared for the
college of next year; he was faintly grasping the wider, fuller world,
and its thoughts and aspirations.

But beside and around and above all this, like subtle, permeating ether,
was--Zora. His feelings for her were not as yet definite, expressed, or
grasped; they were rather the atmosphere in which all things occurred
and were felt and judged. From an amusing pastime she had come to be a
companion and thought-mate; and now, beyond this, insensibly they were
drifting to a silenter, mightier mingling of souls. But drifting,
merely--not arrived; going gently, irresistibly, but not yet at the
realized goal.

He felt all this as the stirring of a mighty force, but knew not what
he felt. The teasing of his fellows, the common love-gossip of the
school yard, seemed far different from his plight. He laughed at it and
indignantly denied it. Yet he was uncomfortable, restless, unhappy. He
fancied Zora cared less for his company, and he gave her less, and then
was puzzled to find time hanging so empty, so wretchedly empty, on his
hands. When they were together in these days they found less to talk
about, and had it not been for the Silver Fleece which in magic
wilfulness opened both their mouths, they would have found their
companionship little more than a series of awkward silences. Yet in
their silences, their walks, and their sittings there was a
companionship, a glow, a satisfaction, as came to them nowhere else on
earth, and they wondered at it.

They were both wondering at it this morning as they watched their
cotton. It had seemingly bounded forward in a night and it must be hoed
forthwith. Yet, hoeing was murder--the ruthless cutting away of tenderer
plants that the sturdier might thrive the more and grow.

"I hate it, Bles, don't you?"

"Hate what?"

"Killing any of it; it's all so pretty."

"But it must be, so that what's left will be prettier, or at least more
useful."

"But it shouldn't be so; everything ought to have a chance to be
beautiful and useful."

"Perhaps it ought to be so," admitted Bles, "but it isn't."

"Isn't it so--anywhere?"

"I reckon not. Death and pain pay for all good things."

She hoed away silently, hesitating over the choice of the plants,
pondering this world-old truth, saddened by its ruthless cruelty.

"Death and pain," she murmured; "what a price!"

Bles leaned on his hoe and considered. It had not occurred to him till
now that Zora was speaking better and better English: the idioms and
errors were dropping away; they had not utterly departed, however, but
came crowding back in moments of excitement. At other times she clothed
Miss Smith's clear-cut, correct speech in softer Southern accents. She
was drifting away from him in some intangible way to an upper world of
dress and language and deportment, and the new thought was pain to him.

So it was that the Fleece rose and spread and grew to its wonderful
flowering; and so these two children grew with it into theirs. Zora
never forgot how they found the first white flower in that green and
billowing sea, nor her low cry of pleasure and his gay shout of joy.
Slowly, wonderfully the flowers spread--white, blue, and purple bells,
hiding timidly, blazing luxuriantly amid the velvet leaves; until one
day--it was after a southern rain and the sunlight was twinkling through
the morning--all the Fleece was in flower--a mighty swaying sea,
darkling rich and waving, and upon it flecks and stars of white and
purple foam. The joy of the two so madly craved expression that they
burst into singing; not the wild light song of dancing feet, but a low,
sweet melody of her fathers' fathers, whereunto Alwyn's own deep voice
fell fitly in minor cadence.

Miss Smith and Miss Taylor, who were sorting the mail, heard them
singing as they came up out of the swamp. Miss Taylor looked at them,
then at Miss Smith.

But Miss Smith sat white and rigid with the first opened letter in her
hand.




_Twelve_

THE PROMISE


Miss Smith sat with her face buried in her hands while the tears
trickled silently through her thin fingers. Before her lay the letter,
read a dozen times:

"Old Mrs. Grey has been to see me, and she has announced her intention
of endowing five colored schools, yours being one. She asked if $500,000
would do it. She has plenty of money, so I told her $750,000 would be
better--$150,000 apiece. She's arranging for a Board of Trust, etc.
You'll probably hear from her soon. You've been so worried about
expenses that I thought I'd send this word on; I knew you'd be glad."

Glad? Dear God, how flat the word fell! For thirty years she had sown
the seed, planting her life-blood in this work, that had become the
marrow of her soul.

Successful? No, it had not been successful; but it had been human.
Through yonder doorway had trooped an army of hundreds upon hundreds of
bright and dull, light and dark, eager and sullen faces. There had been
good and bad, honest and deceptive, frank and furtive. Some had caught,
kindled and flashed to ambition and achievement; some, glowing dimly,
had plodded on in a slow, dumb faithful work worth while; and yet others
had suddenly exploded, hurtling human fragments to heaven and to hell.
Around this school home, as around the centre of some little universe,
had whirled the sorrowful, sordid, laughing, pulsing drama of a world:
birth pains, and the stupor of death; hunger and pale murder; the riot
of thirst and the orgies of such red and black cabins as Elspeth's,
crouching in the swamp.

She groaned as she read of the extravagances of the world and saw her
own vanishing revenues; but the funds continued to dwindle until Sarah
Smith asked herself: "What will become of this school when I die?" With
trembling fingers she had sat down to figure how many teachers must be
dropped next year, when her brother's letter came, and she slipped to
her knees and prayed.

Mrs. Grey's decision was due in no little way to Mary Taylor's reports.
Slowly but surely the girl had begun to think that she had found herself
in this new world. She would never be attuned to it thoroughly, for she
was set for different music. The veil of color and race still hung
thickly between her and her pupils; and yet she seemed to see some
points of penetration. No one could meet daily a hundred or more of
these light-hearted, good-natured children without feeling drawn to
them. No one could cross the thresholds of the cabins and not see the
old and well-known problems of life and striving. More and more,
therefore, the work met Miss Taylor's approval and she told Mrs. Grey
so.

At the same time Mary Taylor had come to some other definite
conclusions: she believed it wrong to encourage the ambitions of these
children to any great extent; she believed they should be servants and
farmers, content to work under present conditions until those conditions
could be changed; and she believed that the local white aristocracy,
helped by Northern philanthropy, should take charge of such gradual
changes.

These conclusions she did not pretend to have originated; but she
adopted them from reading and conversation, after hesitating for a year
before such puzzling contradictions as Bles Alwyn and Harry Cresswell.
For her to conclude to treat Bles Alwyn as a man despite his color was
as impossible as to think Mr. Cresswell a criminal. Some compromise was
imperative which would save her the pleasure of Mr. Cresswell's company
and at the same time leave open a way of fulfilling the world's duty to
this black boy. She thought she had found this compromise and she wrote
Mrs. Grey suggesting a chain of endowed Negro schools under the
management of trustees composed of Northern business men and local
Southern whites. Mrs. Grey acquiesced gladly and announced her plan,
eventually writing Miss Smith of her decision "to second her noble
efforts in helping the poor colored people," and she hoped to have the
plan under way before next fall.

The sharpness of Miss Smith's joy did not let her dwell on the proposed
"Board of Trust"; of course, it would be a board of friends of the
school.

She sat in her office looking out across the land. School had closed for
the year and Bles with the carryall was just taking Miss Taylor to the
train with her trunk and bags. Far up the road she could see dotted here
and there the little dirty cabins of Cresswell's tenants--the Cresswell
domain that lay like a mighty hand around the school, ready at a word to
squeeze its life out. Only yonder, to the eastward, lay the way out; the
five hundred acres of the Tolliver plantation, which the school needed
so sadly for its farm and community. But the owner was a hard and
ignorant white man, hating "niggers" only a shade more than he hated
white aristocrats of the Cresswell type. He had sold the school its
first land to pique the Cresswells; but he would not sell any more, she
was sure, even now when the promise of wealth faced the school.

She lay back and closed her eyes and fell lightly asleep. As she slept
an old woman came toiling up the hill northward from the school, and
out of the eastward spur of the Cresswell barony. She was fat and black,
hooded and aproned, with great round head and massive bosom. Her face
was dull and heavy and homely, her old eyes sorrowful. She moved
swiftly, carrying a basket on her arm. Opposite her, to the southward,
but too far for sight, an old man came out of the lower Cresswell place,
skirting the swamp. He was tall, black, and gaunt, part bald with tufted
hair, and a cowed and furtive look was in his eyes. One leg was
crippled, and he hobbled painfully.

Up the road to the eastward that ran past the school, with the morning
sun at his back, strode a young man, yellow, crisp-haired, strong-faced,
with darkly knit brows. He greeted Bles and the teacher coldly, and
moved on in nervous haste. A woman, hurrying out of the westward swamp
up the path that led from Elspeth's, saw him and shrank back hastily.
She turned quickly into the swamp and waited, looking toward the school.
The old woman hurried into the back gate just as the old man appeared to
the southward on the road. The young man greeted him cordially and they
stopped a moment to talk, while the hiding woman watched.

"Howdy, Uncle Jim."

"Howdy, son. Hit's hot, ain't it? How is you?"

"Tolerable, how are you?"

"Poorly, son, poorly--and worser in mind. I'se goin' up to talk to old
Miss."

"So am I, but I just see Aunt Rachel going in. We'd better wait."

Miss Smith started up at the timid knocking, and rubbed her eyes. It was
long since she had slept in the daytime and she was annoyed at such
laziness. She opened the back door and led the old woman to the office.

"Now, what have you got there?" she demanded, eyeing the basket.

"Just a little chicken fo' you and a few aigs."

"Oh, you are so thoughtful!" Sarah Smith's was a grateful heart.

"Go 'long now--hit ain't a thing."

Then came a pause, the old woman sliding into the proffered seat, while
over her genial, dimpled smile there dropped a dull veil of care. Her
eyes shifted uneasily. Miss Smith tried not to notice the change.

"Well, are you all moved, Aunt Rachel?" she inquired cheerfully.

"No'm, and we ain't gwine to move."

"But I thought it was all arranged."

"It was," gloomily, "but de ole Cunnel, he won't let us go."

The listener was instantly sympathetic. "Why not?" she asked.

"He says we owes him."

"But didn't you settle at Christmas?"

"Yas'm; but when he found we was goin' away, he looked up some more
debts."

"How much?"

"I don't know 'zactly--more'n a hundred dollars. Den de boys done got in
dat trouble, and he paid their fines."

"What was the trouble?"

"Well, one was a-gambling, and the other struck the overseer what was
a-whippin' him."

"Whipping him!"--in horrified exclamation, quite as much at Aunt
Rachel's matter-of-fact way of regarding the matter as at the deed
itself.

"Yas'm. He didn't do his work right and he whipped him. I speck he
needed it."

"But he's a grown man," Miss Smith urged earnestly.

"Yas'm; he's twenty now, and big."

"Whipped him!" Miss Smith repeated. "And so you can't leave?"

"No'm, he say he'll sell us out and put us in de chain-gang if we go.
The boys is plumb mad, but I'se a-pleadin' with 'em not to do nothin'
rash."

"But--but I thought they had already started to work a crop on the
Tolliver place?"

"Yes'm, dey had; but, you see, dey were arrested, and then Cunnel
Cresswell took 'em and 'lowed they couldn't leave his place. Ol' man
Tolliver was powerful mad."

"Why, Aunt Rachel, it's slavery!" cried the lady in dismay. Aunt Rachel
did not offer to dispute her declaration.

"Yas'm, hit's slavery," she agreed. "I hates it mighty bad, too, 'cause
I wanted de little chillens in school; but--" The old woman broke down
and sobbed.

A knocking came at the door; hastily wiping her eyes Aunt Rachel rose.

"I'll--I'll see what I can do, Aunt Rachel--I must do something,"
murmured Miss Smith hastily, as the woman departed, and an old black man
came limping in. Miss Smith looked up in surprise.

"I begs pardon, Mistress--I begs pardon. Good-morning."

"Good-morning--" she hesitated.

"Sykes--Jim Sykes--that's me."

"Yes, I've heard of you, Mr. Sykes; you live over south of the swamp."

"Yes, ma'am, that's me; and I'se got a little shack dar and a bit of
land what I'se trying to buy."

"Of Colonel Cresswell?"

"Yas'm, of de Cunnel."

"And how long have you been buying it?"

"Going on ten year now; and dat's what I comes to ask you about."

"Goodness me! And how much have you paid a year?"

"I gen'rally pays 'bout three bales of cotton a year."

"Does he furnish you rations?"

"Only sugar and coffee and a little meat now and then."

"What does it amount to a year?"

"I doesn't rightly know--but I'se got some papers here."

Miss Smith looked them over and sighed. It was the same old tale of
blind receipts for money "on account"--no items, no balancing. By his
help she made out that last year his total bill at Cresswell's store was
perhaps forty dollars.

"An' last year's bill was bigger'n common 'cause I hurt my leg working
at the gin and had to have some medicine."

"Why, as far as I can see, Mr. Sykes, you've paid Cresswell about a
thousand dollars in the last ten years. How large is your place?"

"About twenty acres."

"And what were you to pay for it?"

"Four hundred."

"Have you got the deed?"

"Yes'm, but I ain't finished paying yet; de Cunnel say as how I owes him
two hundred dollars still, and I can't see it. Dat's why I come over
here to talk wid you."

"Where is the deed?"

He handed it to her and her heart sank. It was no deed, but a
complicated contract binding the tenant hand and foot to the landlord.
She sighed, he watching her eagerly.

"I'se getting old," he explained, "and I ain't got nobody to take care
of me. I can't work as I once could, and de overseers dey drives me too
hard. I wants a little home to die in."

Miss Smith's throat swelled. She couldn't tell him that he would never
get one at the present rate; she only said:

"I'll--look this up. You come again next Saturday."

Then sadly she watched the ragged old slave hobble away with his
cherished "papers." He greeted the young man at the gate and passed out,
while the latter walked briskly up to the door and knocked.

"Why, how do you do, Robert?"

"How do you do, Miss Smith?"

"Well, are you getting things in shape so as to enter school early next
year?"

Robert looked embarrassed.

"That's what I came to tell you, Miss Smith. Mr. Cresswell has offered
me forty acres of good land."

Miss Smith looked disheartened.

"Robert, here you are almost finished, and my heart is set on your going
to Atlanta University and finishing college. With your fine voice and
talent for drawing--"

A dogged look settled on Robert's young bright face, and the speaker
paused.

"What's the use, Miss Smith--what opening is there for a--a nigger with
an education?"

Miss Smith was shocked.

"Why--why, every chance," she protested, "and where there's none _make_
a chance!"

"Miss Taylor says"--Miss Smith's heart sank; how often had she heard
that deadening phrase in the last year!--"that there's no use. That
farming is the only thing we ought to try to do, and I reckon she thinks
there ain't much chance even there."

"Robert, farming is a noble calling. Whether you're suited to it or not,
I don't yet know, but I'd like nothing better than to see you settled
here in a decent home with a family, running a farm. But, Robert,
farming doesn't call for less intelligence than other things; it calls
for more. It is because the world thinks any training good enough for a
farmer that the Southern farmer is today practically at the mercy of his
keener and more intelligent fellows. And of all people, Robert, your
people need trained intelligence to cope with this problem of farming
here. Without intelligence and training and some capital it is the
wildest nonsense to think you can lead your people out of slavery. Look
round you." She told him of the visitors. "Are they not hard working
honest people?"

"Yes, ma'am."

"Yet they are slaves--dumb driven cattle."

"But they have no education."

"And you have a smattering; therefore are ready to pit yourself against
the organized plantation system without capital or experience. Robert,
you may succeed; you may find your landlord honest and the way clear;
but my advice to you is--finish your education, develop your talents,
and then come to your life work a full-fledged man and not a
half-ignorant boy."

"I'll think of it," returned the boy soberly. "I reckon you're right. I
know Miss Taylor don't think much of us. But I'm tired of waiting; I
want to get to work."

Miss Smith laid a kindly hand upon his shoulder.

"I've been waiting thirty years, Robert," she said, with feeling, and he
hung his head.

"I wanted to talk about it," he awkwardly responded, turning slowly
away. But Miss Smith stopped him.

"Robert, where is the land Cresswell offers you?"

"It's on the Tolliver place."

"The Tolliver place?"

"Yes, he is going to buy it."

Miss Smith dismissed the boy absently and sat down. The crisis seemed
drawing near. She had not dreamed the Tolliver place was for sale. The
old man must be hard pressed to sell to the Cresswells.

She started up. Why not go see him? Perhaps a mortgage on the strength
of the endowment? It was dangerous--but--

She threw a veil over her hair, and opened the door. A woman stood
there, who shrank and cowered, as if used to blows. Miss Smith eyed her
grimly, then slowly stepped back.

"Come in," she commanded briefly, motioning the woman to a chair.

But she stood, a pathetic figure, faded, worn, yet with unmistakable
traces of beauty in her golden face and soft brown hair. Miss Smith
contemplated her sadly. Here was her most haunting failure, this girl
whom she first had seen twelve years ago in her wonderful girlish
comeliness. She had struggled and fought for her, but the forces of the
devil had triumphed. She caught glimpses of her now and then, but today
was the first time she had spoken to her for ten years. She saw the
tears that gathered but did not fall; then her hands quivered.

"Bertie," she began brokenly. The girl shivered, but stood aloof.

"Miss Smith," she said. "No--don't talk--I'm bad--but I've got a little
girl, Miss Smith, ten years old, and--and--I'm afraid for her; I want
you to take her."

"I have no place for one so young. And why are you afraid for her?"

"The men there are beginning to notice her."

"Where?"

"At Elspeth's."

"Do you stay there now?"

"Yes."

"Why?"

"_He_ wants me to."

"Must you do as he wants?"

"Yes. But I want the child--different."

"Don't _you_ want to be different?"

The woman quivered again but she answered steadily: "No."

Miss Smith sank into a chair and moistened her dry lips.

"Elspeth's is an awful place," she affirmed solemnly.

"Yes."

"And Zora?"

"She is not there much now, she stays away."

"But if she escapes, why not you?"

"She wants to escape."

"And you?"

"I don't want to."

This stubborn depravity was so distressing that Sarah Smith was at an
utter loss what to say or do.

"I can do nothing--" she began.

"For me," the woman quickly replied; "I don't ask anything; but for the
child,--she isn't to blame."

The older woman wavered.

"Won't you try?" pleaded the younger.

"Yes--I'll try, I'll try; I am trying all the time, but there are more
things than my weak strength can do. Good-bye."

Miss Smith stood a long time in the doorway, watching the fading figure
and vaguely trying to remember what it was that she had started to do,
when the sharp staccato step of a mule drew her attention to a rider who
stopped at the gate. It was her neighbor, Tolliver--a gaunt,
yellow-faced white man, ragged, rough, and unkempt; one of the poor
whites who had struggled up and failed. He spent no courtesy on the
"nigger" teacher, but sat in his saddle and called her to the gate, and
she went.

"Say," he roughly opened up, "I've got to sell some land and them damn
Cresswells are after it. You can have it for five thousand dollars if
you git the cash in a week." With a muttered oath he rode abruptly off;
but not before she had seen the tears in his eyes.

All night Sarah Smith lay thinking, and all day she thought and dreamed.
Toward dark she walked slowly out the gate and up the highway toward the
Cresswell oaks. She had never been within the gates before, and she
looked about thoughtfully. The great trees in their regular curving rows
must have been planted more than half a century ago. The lawn was well
tended and the flowers. Yes, there were signs of taste and wealth. "But
it was built on a moan," cried Miss Smith to herself, passionately, and
she would not look round any more, but stared straight ahead where she
saw old Colonel Cresswell smoking and reading on the verandah.

The Colonel saw her, too, and was uneasy, for he knew that Miss Smith
had a sharp tongue and a most disconcerting method of argument, which
he, as a Southern gentleman, courteous to all white females, even if
they did eat with "niggers," could not properly answer. He received her
with courtesy, offered a chair, laid aside his cigar, and essayed some
general remarks on cotton weather. But Miss Smith plunged into her
subject:

"Colonel Cresswell, I'm thinking of raising some money from a mortgage
on our school property."

The Colonel's face involuntarily lighted up. He thought he saw the
beginning of the end of an institution which had been a thorn in his
flesh ever since Tolliver, in a fit of rage, had sold land for a Negro
school.

"H'm," he reflected deprecatingly, wiping his brow.

"I need some ready money," she continued, "to keep from curtailing our
work."

"Indeed?"

"I have good prospects in a year or so"--the Colonel looked up sharply,
but said nothing--"and so I thought of a mortgage."

"Money is pretty tight," was the Colonel's first objection.

"The land is worth, you know, at least fifty dollars an acre."

"Not more than twenty-five dollars, I fear."

"Why, you wanted seventy-five dollars for poorer land last year! We have
two hundred acres." It was not for nothing that this lady had been born
in New England.

"I wouldn't reckon it as worth more than five thousand dollars,"
insisted the Colonel.

"And ten thousand dollars for improvements."

But the Colonel arose. "You had better talk to the directors of the
Jefferson Bank," he said politely. "They may accommodate you--how much
would you want?"

"Five thousand dollars," Miss Smith replied. Then she hesitated. That
would buy the land, to be sure; but money was needed to develop and run
it; to install tenants; and then, too, for new teachers. But she said
nothing more, and, nodding to his polite bow, departed. Colonel
Cresswell had noticed her hesitation, and thought of it as he settled to
his cigar again.

Bles Alwyn arose next morning and examined the sky critically. He
feared rain. The season had been quite wet enough, particularly down on
the swamp land, and but yesterday Bles had viewed his dykes with
apprehension for the black pool scowled about them. He dared not think
what a long heavy rain might do to the wonderful island of cotton which
now stood fully five feet high, with flowers and squares and budding
bolls. It might not rain, but the safest thing would be to work at those
dykes, so he started for spade and hoe. He heard Miss Smith calling,
however.

"Bles--hitch up!"

He was vexed. "Are you--in a hurry, Miss Smith?" he asked.

"Yes, I am," she replied, with unmistakable positiveness.

He started off, and hesitated. "Miss Smith, would Jim do to drive?"

"No," sharply. "I want you particularly." At another time she might have
observed his anxiety, but today she was agitated. She knew she was
taking a critical step.

Slowly Bles hitched up. After all it might not rain, he argued as they
jogged toward town. In silence they rode on. Bles kept looking at the
skies. The south was getting darker and darker. It might rain. It might
rain only an hour or so, but, suppose it should rain a day--two days--a
week?

Miss Smith was looking at her own skies and despite the promised sunrise
they loomed darkly. Five thousand was needed for the land and at least
another thousand for repairs. Two thousand would "buy" a half dozen
desirable tenants by paying their debts to their present landlords. Then
two thousand would be wanted for new teachers and a carpenter shop--ten
thousand dollars!

It was a great temptation. And yet, once in the hands of these
past-masters of debt-manipulation, would her school be safe? Suppose,
after all, this Grey gift--but she caught her breath sharply just as a
wet splash of rain struck upon her forehead. No. God could not be so
cruel. She pushed her bonnet back: how good and cool the water felt! But
on Bles as he raised the buggy top it felt hot and fiery.

He felt the coming of some great calamity, the end of a dream. This
rain might stay for days; it looked like such a downpour; and that would
mean the end of the Silver Fleece; the end of Zora's hopes; the end of
everything. He gulped in despairing anger and hit the staid old horse
the smartest tap she had known all summer.

"Why, Bles, what's the matter?" called Miss Smith, as the horse started
forward. He murmured something about getting wet and drew up at the
Toomsville bank.

Miss Smith was invited politely into the private parlor. She explained
her business. The President was there and Colonel Cresswell and one
other local director.

"I have come for a mortgage. Our land is, as you know, gentlemen, worth
at least ten thousand dollars; the buildings cost fifteen thousand
dollars; our property is, therefore, conservatively valued at
twenty-five thousand dollars. Now I want to mortgage it for"--she
hesitated--"five thousand dollars."

Colonel Cresswell was silent, but the president said:

"Money is rather scarce just now, Miss Smith; but it happens that I have
ten thousand dollars on hand, which we prefer, however, to loan in one
lump sum. Now, if the security were ample, I think perhaps you might get
this ten thousand dollars."

Miss Smith grew white; it was the sum she wanted. She tried to escape
the temptation, yet the larger amount was more than twice as desirable
to her as the smaller, and she knew that they knew it. They were trying
to tempt her; they wanted as firm a hold on the school property as
possible. And yet, why should she hesitate? It was a risk, but the
returns would be enormous--she must do it. Besides, there was the
endowment; it was certain; yes--she felt forced to close the bargain.

"Very well," she declared her decision, and they handed her the
preliminary papers. She took the pen and glanced at Mr. Cresswell; he
was smiling slightly, but nevertheless she signed her name grimly, in a
large round hand, "Sarah Smith."




_Thirteen_

MRS. GREY GIVES A DINNER


The Hon. Charles Smith, Miss Sarah's brother, was walking swiftly uptown
from Mr. Easterly's Wall Street office and his face was pale. At last
the Cotton Combine was to all appearances an assured fact and he was
slated for the Senate. The price he had paid was high: he was to
represent the interests of the new trust and sundry favorable measures
were already drafted and reposing in the safe of the combine's legal
department. Among others was one relating to child labor, another that
would effect certain changes in the tariff, and a proposed law providing
for a cotton bale of a shape and dimensions different from the
customary--the last constituting a particularly clever artifice which,
under the guise of convenience in handling, would necessitate the
installation of entirely new gin and compress machinery, to be supplied,
of course, by the trust.

As Mr. Smith drew near Mrs. Grey's Murray Hill residence his face had
melted to a cynical smile. After all why should he care? He had tried
independence and philanthropy and failed. Why should he not be as other
men? He had seen many others that very day swallow the golden bait and
promise everything. They were gentlemen. Why should he pose as better
than his fellows? There was young Cresswell. Did his aristocratic air
prevent his succumbing to the lure of millions and promising the
influence of his father and the whole Farmer's League to the new
project? Mr. Smith snapped his fingers and rang the bell. The door
opened softly. The dark woodwork of the old English wainscoting glowed
with the crimson flaming of logs in the wide fireplace. There was just
the touch of early autumn chill in the air without, that made both the
fire and the table with its soft linen, gold and silver plate, and
twinkling glasses a warming, satisfying sight.

Mrs. Grey was a portly woman, inclined to think much of her dinner and
her clothes, both of which were always rich and costly. She was not
herself a notably intelligent woman; she greatly admired intelligence or
whatever looked to her like intelligence in others. Her money, too, was
to her an ever worrying mystery and surprise, which she found herself
always scheming to husband shrewdly and spend philanthropically--a
difficult combination.

As she awaited her guests she surveyed the table with both satisfaction
and disquietude, for her social functions were few, tonight there
were--she checked them off on her fingers--Sir James Creighton, the rich
English manufacturer, and Lady Creighton, Mr. and Mrs. Vanderpool, Mr.
Harry Cresswell and his sister, John Taylor and his sister, and Mr.
Charles Smith, whom the evening papers mentioned as likely to be United
States Senator from New Jersey--a selection of guests that had been
determined, unknown to the hostess, by the meeting of cotton interests
earlier in the day.

Mrs. Grey's chef was high-priced and efficient, and her butler was the
envy of many; consequently, she knew the dinner would be good. To her
intense satisfaction, it was far more than this. It was a most agreeable
couple of hours; all save perhaps Mr. Smith unbent, the Englishman
especially, and the Vanderpools were most gracious; but if the general
pleasure was owing to any one person particularly it was to Mr. Harry
Cresswell. Mrs. Grey had met Southerners before, but not intimately, and
she always had in mind vividly their cruelty to "poor Negroes," a
subject she made a point of introducing forthwith. She was therefore
most agreeably surprised to hear Mr. Cresswell express himself so
cordially as approving of Negro education.

"Why, I thought," said Mrs. Grey, "that you Southerners rather
disapproved--or at least--"

Mr. Cresswell inclined his head courteously.

"We Southerners, my dear Mrs. Grey, are responsible for a variety of
reputations." And he told an anecdote that set the table laughing.
"Seriously, though," he continued, "we are not as black as the blacks
paint us, although on the whole I _prefer_ that Helen should marry--a
white man."

They all glanced at Miss Cresswell, who lay softly back in her chair
like a white lily, gleaming and bejewelled, her pale face flushing under
the scrutiny; Mrs. Grey was horrified.

"Why--why the idea!" she sputtered. "Why, Mr. Cresswell, how can you
conceive of anything else--no Northerner dreams--"

Mr. Cresswell sipped his wine slowly.

"No--no--I do not think you do _mean_ that--" He paused and the
Englishman bent forward.

"Really, now, you do not mean to say that there is a danger of--of
amalgamation, do you?" he sang.

Mr. Cresswell explained. No, of course there was no immediate danger;
but when people were suddenly thrust beyond their natural station,
filled with wild ideas and impossible ambitions, it meant terrible
danger to Southern white women.

"But you believe in some education?" asked Mary Taylor.

"I believe in the training of people to their highest capacity." The
Englishman here heartily seconded him.

"But," Cresswell added significantly, "capacity differs enormously
between races."

The Vanderpools were sure of this and the Englishman, instancing India,
became quite eloquent. Mrs. Grey was mystified, but hardly dared admit
it. The general trend of the conversation seemed to be that most
individuals needed to be submitted to the sharpest scrutiny before being
allowed much education, and as for the "lower races" it was simply
criminal to open such useless opportunities to them.

"Why, I had a colored servant-girl once," laughed Mrs. Vanderpool by way
of climax, "who spent half her wages in piano lessons."

Then Mary Taylor, whose conscience was uncomfortable, said:

"But, Mr. Cresswell, you surely believe in schools like Miss Smith's?"

"Decidedly," returned Mr. Cresswell, with enthusiasm, "it has done great
good."

Mrs. Grey was gratified and murmured something of Miss Smith's
"sacrifice."

"Positively heroic," added Cresswell, avoiding his sister's eyes.

"Of course," Mary Taylor hastened to encourage this turn of the
conversation, "there are many points on which Miss Smith and I disagree,
but I think everybody admires her work."

Mrs. Grey wanted particulars. "What did you disagree about?" she asked
bluntly.

"I may be responsible for some of the disagreement," interrupted Mr.
Cresswell, hesitatingly; "I'm afraid Miss Smith does not approve of us
white Southerners."

"But you mean to say you can't even advise her?"

"Oh, no; we can. But--we're not--er--exactly welcomed. In fact," said
Cresswell gravely, "the chief criticism I have against your Northerners'
schools for Negroes is, that they not only fail to enlist the sympathy
and aid of the _best_ Southerners, but even repel it."

"That is very wrong--very wrong," commented the Englishman warmly, a
sentiment in which Mrs. Grey hastened to agree.

"Of course," continued Cresswell, "I am free to confess that I have no
personal desire to dabble in philanthropy, or conduct schools of any
kind; my hands are full of other matters."

"But it's precisely the advice of such disinterested men that
philanthropic work needs," Mr. Vanderpool urged.

"Well, I volunteered advice once in this case and I sha'n't repeat the
experiment soon," said Cresswell laughing. Mrs. Grey wanted to hear the
incident, but the young man was politely reluctant. Mary Taylor,
however, related the tale of Zora to Mrs. Grey's private ear later.

"Fortunately," said Mr. Vanderpool, "Northerners and Southerners are
arriving at a better mutual understanding on most of these matters."

"Yes, indeed," Cresswell agreed. "After all, they never were far apart,
even in slavery days; both sides were honest and sincere."

All through the dinner Mr. Smith had been preoccupied and taciturn. Now
he abruptly shot a glance at Cresswell.

"I suppose that one was right and one was wrong."

"No," said Cresswell, "both were right."

"I thought the only excuse for fighting was a great Right; if Right is
on neither side or simultaneously on both, then War is not only Hell but
Damnation."

Mrs. Grey looked shocked and Mrs. Vanderpool smiled.

"How about fighting for exercise?" she suggested.

"At any rate," said Cresswell, "we can all agree on helping these poor
victims of our quarrel as far as their limited capacity will allow--and
no farther, for that is impossible."

Very soon after dinner Charles Smith excused himself. He was not yet
inured to the ways of high finance, and the programme of the cotton
barons, as unfolded that day, lay heavy on his mind, despite all his
philosophy.

"I have had a--full day," he explained to Mrs. Grey.




_Fourteen_

LOVE


The rain was sweeping down in great thick winding sheets. The wind
screamed in the ancient Cresswell oaks and swirled across the swamp in
loud, wild gusts. The waters roared and gurgled in the streams, and
along the roadside. Then, when the wind fell murmuring away, the clouds
grew blacker and blacker and rain in long slim columns fell straight
from Heaven to earth digging itself into the land and throwing back the
red mud in angry flashes.

So it rained for one long week, and so for seven endless days Bles
watched it with leaden heart. He knew the Silver Fleece--his and
Zora's--must be ruined. It was the first great sorrow of his life; it
was not so much the loss of the cotton itself--but the fantasy, the
hopes, the dreams built around it. If it failed, would not they fail?
Was not this angry beating rain, this dull spiritless drizzle, this wild
war of air and earth, but foretaste and prophecy of ruin and
discouragement, of the utter futility of striving? But if his own
despair was great his pain at the plight of Zora made it almost
unbearable. He did not see her in these seven days. He pictured her
huddled there in the swamp in the cheerless leaky cabin with worse than
no companions. Ah! the swamp, the cruel swamp! It was a fearful place in
the rain. Its oozing mud and fetid vapors, its clinging slimy
draperies,--how they twined about the bones of its victims and chilled
their hearts. Yet here his Zora,--his poor disappointed child--was
imprisoned.

Child? He had always called her child--but now in the inward
illumination of these dark days he knew her as neither child nor sister
nor friend, but as the One Woman. The revelation of his love lighted and
brightened slowly till it flamed like a sunrise over him and left him in
burning wonder. He panted to know if she, too, knew, or knew and cared
not, or cared and knew not. She was so strange and human a creature. To
her all things meant something--nothing was aimless, nothing merely
happened. Was this rain beating down and back her love for him, or had
she never loved? He walked his room, gripping his hands, peering through
the misty windows toward the swamp--rain, rain, rain, nothing but rain.
The world was water veiled in mists.

Then of a sudden, at midday, the sun shot out, hot and still; no breath
of air stirred; the sky was like blue steel; the earth steamed. Bles
rushed to the edge of the swamp and stood there irresolute. Perhaps--if
the water had but drained from the cotton!--it was so strong and tall!
But, pshaw! Where was the use of imagining? The lagoon had been level
with the dykes a week ago; and now? He could almost see the beautiful
Silver Fleece, bedraggled, drowned, and rolling beneath the black lake
of slime. He went back to his work, but early in the morning the thought
of it lured him again. He must at least see the grave of his hope and
Zora's, and out of it resurrect new love and strength.

Perhaps she, too, might be there, waiting, weeping. He started at the
thought. He hurried forth sadly. The rain-drops were still dripping and
gleaming from the trees, flashing back the heavy yellow sunlight. He
splashed and stamped along, farther and farther onward until he neared
the rampart of the clearing, and put foot upon the tree-bridge. Then he
looked down. The lagoon was dry. He stood a moment bewildered, then
turned and rushed upon the island. A great sheet of dazzling sunlight
swept the place, and beneath lay a mighty mass of olive green, thick,
tall, wet, and willowy. The squares of cotton, sharp-edged, heavy, were
just about to burst to bolls! And underneath, the land lay carefully
drained and black! For one long moment he paused, stupid, agape with
utter amazement, then leaned dizzily against a tree.

The swamp, the eternal swamp, had been drained in its deepest fastness;
but, how?--how? He gazed about, perplexed, astonished. What a field of
cotton! what a marvellous field! But how had it been saved?

He skirted the island slowly, stopping near Zora's oak. Here lay the
reading of the riddle: with infinite work and pain, some one had dug a
canal from the lagoon to the creek, into which the former had drained by
a long and crooked way, thus allowing it to empty directly. The canal
went straight, a hundred yards through stubborn soil, and it was oozing
now with slimy waters.

He sat down weak, bewildered, and one thought was uppermost--Zora! And
with the thought came a low moan of pain. He wheeled and leapt toward
the dripping shelter in the tree. There she lay--wet, bedraggled,
motionless, gray-pallid beneath her dark-drawn skin, her burning eyes
searching restlessly for some lost thing, her lips a-moaning.

In dumb despair he dropped beside her and gathered her in his arms. The
earth staggered beneath him as he stumbled on; the mud splashed and
sunlight glistened; he saw long snakes slithering across his path and
fear-struck beasts fleeing before his coming. He paused for neither path
nor way but went straight for the school, running in mighty strides, yet
gently, listening to the moans that struck death upon his heart. Once he
fell headlong, but with a great wrench held her from harm, and minded
not the pain that shot through his ribs. The yellow sunshine beat
fiercely around and upon him, as he stumbled into the highway, lurched
across the mud-strewn road, and panted up the porch.

"Miss Smith--!" he gasped, and then--darkness.

The years of the days of her dying were ten. The boy that entered the
darkness and the shadow of death emerged a man, a silent man and grave,
working furiously and haunting, day and night, the little window above
the door. At last, of one gray morning when the earth was stillest, they
came and told him, "She will live!" And he went out under the stars,
lifted his long arms and sobbed: "Curse me, O God, if I let me lose her
again!" And God remembered this in after years.

The hope and dream of harvest was upon the land. The cotton crop was
short and poor because of the great rain; but the sun had saved the
best, and the price had soared. So the world was happy, and the face of
the black-belt green and luxuriant with thickening flecks of the coming
foam of the cotton.

Up in the sick room Zora lay on the little white bed. The net and web of
endless things had been crawling and creeping around her; she had
struggled in dumb, speechless terror against some mighty grasping that
strove for her life, with gnarled and creeping fingers; but now at last,
weakly, she opened her eyes and questioned.

Bles, where was he? The Silver Fleece, how was it? The Sun, the Swamp?
Then finding all well, she closed her eyes and slept. After some days
they let her sit by the window, and she saw Bles pass, but drew back
timidly when he looked; and he saw only the flutter of her gown, and
waved.

At last there came a day when they let her walk down to the porch, and
she felt the flickering of her strength again. Yet she looked different;
her buxom comeliness was spiritualized; her face looked smaller, and her
masses of hair, brought low about her ears, heightened her ghostly
beauty; her skin was darkly transparent, and her eyes looked out from
velvet veils of gloom. For a while she lay in her chair, in happy,
dreamy pleasure at sun and bird and tree. Bles did not know yet that she
was down; but soon he would come searching, for he came each hour, and
she pressed her little hands against her breast to still the beating of
her heart and the bursting wonder of her love.

Then suddenly a panic seized her. He must not find her here--not here;
there was but one place in all the earth for them to meet, and that was
yonder in the Silver Fleece. She rose with a fleeting glance, gathered
the shawl round her, then gliding forward, wavering, tremulous, slipped
across the road and into the swamp. The dark mystery of the Swamp swept
over her; the place was hers. She had been born within its borders;
within its borders she had lived and grown, and within its borders she
had met her love. On she hurried until, sweeping down to the lagoon and
the island, lo! the cotton lay before her! A great white foam was spread
upon its brown and green; the whole field was waving and shivering in
the sunlight. A low cry of pleasure burst from her lips; she forgot her
weakness, and picking her way across the bridge, stood still amid the
cotton that nestled about her shoulders, clasping it lovingly in her
hands.

He heard that she was down-stairs and ran to meet her with beating
heart. The chair was empty; but he knew. There was but one place then
for these two souls to meet. Yet it was far, and he feared, and ran with
startled eyes.

She stood on the island, ethereal, splendid, like some tall, dark, and
gorgeous flower of the storied East. The green and white of the cotton
billowed and foamed about her breasts; the red scarf burned upon her
neck; the dark brown velvet of her skin pulsed warm and tremulous with
the uprushing blood, and in the midnight depths of her great eyes flamed
the mighty fires of long-concealed and new-born love.

He darted through the trees and paused, a tall man strongly but slimly
made. He threw up his hands in the old way and hallooed; happily she
crooned back a low mother-melody, and waited. He came down to her
slowly, with fixed, hungry eyes, threading his way amid the Fleece. She
did not move, but lifted both her dark hands, white with cotton; and
then, as he came, casting it suddenly to the winds, in tears and
laughter she swayed and dropped quivering in his arms. And all the world
was sunshine and peace.




_Fifteen_

REVELATION


Harry Cresswell was scowling over his breakfast. It was not because his
apartment in the New York hotel was not satisfactory, or his breakfast
unpalatable; possibly a rather bewildering night in Broadway was
expressing its influence; but he was satisfied that his ill-temper was
due to a paragraph in the morning paper:

"It is stated on good authority that the widow of the late
multimillionaire, Job Grey, will announce a large and carefully planned
scheme of Negro education in the South, and will richly endow schools in
South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Louisiana, and Texas."

Cresswell finally thrust his food away. He knew that Mrs. Grey helped
Miss Smith's school, and supposed she would continue to do so; with that
in mind he had striven to impress her, hoping that she might trust his
judgment in later years. He had no idea, however, that she meant to
endow the school, or entertained wholesale plans for Negro education.
The knowledge made him suspicious. Why had neither Mary nor John Taylor
mentioned this? Was there, after all, some "nigger-loving" conspiracy
back of the cotton combine? He took his hat and started down-town.

Once in John Taylor's Broadway office, he opened the subject
abruptly--the more so perhaps because he felt a resentment against
Taylor for certain unnamed or partially voiced assumptions. Here was a
place, however, for speech, and he spoke almost roughly.

"Taylor, what does this mean?" He thrust the clipping at him.

"Mean? That Mrs. Grey is going to get rid of some of her surplus
cash--is going to endow some nigger schools," Taylor drily retorted.

"It must be stopped," declared Cresswell.

The other's brows drew up.

"Why?" in a surprised tone.

"Why? Why? Do you think the plantation system can be maintained without
laborers? Do you think there's the slightest chance of cornering cotton
and buying the Black Belt if the niggers are unwilling to work under
present conditions? Do you know the man that stands ready to gobble up
every inch of cotton land in this country at a price which no trust can
hope to rival?"

John Taylor's interest quickened.

"Why, no," he returned sharply. "Who?"

"The Black Man, whose woolly head is filled with ideas of rising. We're
striving by main force to prevent this, and here come your damned
Northern philanthropists to plant schools. Why, Taylor, it'll knock the
cotton trust to hell."

"Don't get excited," said Taylor, judicially. "We've got things in our
hands; it's the Grey money, you know, that is back of us."

"That's just what confounds me," declared the perplexed young man. "Are
you men fools, or rascals? Don't you see the two schemes can't mix?
They're dead opposite, mutually contradictory, absolutely--" Taylor
checked him; it was odd to behold Harry Cresswell so disturbed.

"Well, wait a moment. Let's see. Sit down. Wish I had a cigar for you,
but I don't smoke."

"Do you happen to have any whiskey handy?"

"No, I don't drink."

"Well, what the devil--Oh, well, fire away."

"Now, see here. We control the Grey millions. Of course, we've got to
let her play with her income, and that's considerable. Her favorite game
just now is Negro education, and she's planning to go in heavy. Her
adviser in this line, however, is Smith, and he belongs to us."

"What Smith?"

"Why, the man who's going to be Senator from New Jersey. He has a sister
teaching in the South--you know, of course; it's at your home where my
sister Mary taught."

"Great Scott! Is that woman's brother going to spend this money? Why,
are you daft? See here! American cotton-spinning supremacy is built on
cheap cotton; cheap cotton is built on cheap niggers. Educating, or
rather _trying_ to educate niggers, will make them restless and
discontented--that is, scarce and dear as workers. Don't you see you're
planning to cut off your noses? This Smith School, particularly, has
nearly ruined our plantation. It's stuck almost in our front yard; _you_
are planning to put our plough-hands all to studying Greek, and at the
same time to corner the cotton crop--rot!"

John Taylor caressed his lean jaw.

"New point of view to me; I sort of thought education would improve
things in the South," he commented, unmoved.

"It would if we ran it."

"We?"

"Yes--we Southerners."

"Um!--I see--there's light. See here, let's talk to Easterly about
this." They went into the next office, and after a while got audience
with the trust magnate. Mr. Easterly heard the matter carefully and
waved it aside.

"Oh, that doesn't concern us, Taylor; let Cresswell take care of the
whole thing. We'll see that Smith does what Cresswell wants."

But Taylor shook his head.

"Smith would kick. Mrs. Grey would get suspicious, and the devil be to
pay. This is better. Form a big committee of Northern business men like
yourself--philanthropists like Vanderpool, and Southerners like
Cresswell; let them be a sort of Negro Education steering-committee.
We'll see that on such committee you Southerners get what you
want--control of Negro education."

"That sounds fair. But how about the Smith School? My father writes me
that they are showing signs of expecting money right off--is that true?
If it is, I want it stopped; it will ruin our campaign for the Farmers'
League."

John Taylor looked at Cresswell. He thought he saw something more than
general policy, or even racial prejudice--something personal--in his
vehemence. The Smith School was evidently a severe thorn in the flesh of
this man. All the more reason for mollifying him. Then, too, there was
something in his argument. It was not wise to start educating these
Negroes and getting them discontented just now. Ignorant labor was not
ideal, but it was worth too much to employers to lose it now. Educated
Negro labor might be worth more to Negroes, but not to the cotton
combine. "H'm--well, then--" and John Taylor went into a brown study,
while Cresswell puffed impatiently at a cigarette.

"I have it," said Taylor. Cresswell sat up. "First, let Mr. Easterly get
Smith." Easterly turned to the telephone.

"Is that you, Smith?"

"Well, this is Easterly.... Yes--how about Mrs. Grey's education
schemes?... Yes.... h'm--well,--see here Smith, we must go a little easy
there.... Oh, no, no,--but to advertise just now a big scheme of Negro
Education would drive the Cresswells, the Farmers' League, and the whole
business South dead against us.... Yes, yes indeed; they believe in
education all right, but they ain't in for training lawyers and
professors just yet.... No, I don't suppose her school is.... Well,
then; see here. She'll be reasonable, won't she, and placate the
Cresswells?... No, I mean run the school to suit their ideas.... No, no,
but in general along the lines which they could approve.... Yes, I
thought so ... of course ... good-bye."

"Inclined to be a little nasty?" asked Taylor.

"A little sharp--but tractable. Now, Mr. Cresswell, the thing is in your
hands. We'll get this committee which Taylor suggests appointed, and
send it on a junket to Alabama; you do the rest--see?"

"Who'll be the committee?" asked Cresswell.

"Name it."

Mr. Cresswell smiled and left.

The winter started in severely, and it was easy to fill two private cars
with members of the new Negro Education Board right after Thanksgiving.
Cresswell had worked carefully and with caution. There was Mrs. Grey,
comfortable and beaming, Mr. Easterly, who thought this a good business
opportunity, and his family. Mrs. Vanderpool liked the South and was
amused at the trip, and had induced Mr. Vanderpool to come by stories of
shooting.

"Ah!" said Mr. Vanderpool.

Mr. Charles Smith and John Taylor were both too busy to go, but
bronchial trouble induced the Rev. Dr. Boldish of St. Faith's rich
parish to be one of the party, and at the last moment Temple Bocombe,
the sociologist, consented to join.

"Awfully busy," he said, "but I've been reading up on the Negro problem
since you mentioned the matter to me last week, Mr. Cresswell, and I
think I understand it thoroughly. I may be able to help out."

The necessary spice of young womanhood was added to the party by Miss
Taylor and Miss Cresswell, together with the silent Miss Boldish. They
were a comfortable and sometimes merry party. Dr. Boldish pointed out
the loafers at the stations, especially the black ones; Mr. Bocombe
counted them and estimated the number of hours of work lost at ten cents
an hour.

"Do they get that--ten cents an hour?" asked Miss Taylor.

"Oh, I don't know," replied Mr. Bocombe; "but suppose they do, for
instance. That is an average wage today."

"They look lazy," said Mrs. Grey.

"They are lazy," said Mr. Cresswell.

"So am I," added Mrs. Vanderpool, suppressing a yawn.

"It is uninteresting," murmured her husband, preparing for a nap.

On the whole the members of the party enjoyed themselves from the moment
they drew out of Jersey City to the afternoon when, in four carriages,
they rolled beneath the curious eyes of all Toomsville and swept under
the shadowed rampart of the swamp.

"The Christmas" was coming and all the Southern world was busy. Few
people were busier than Bles and Zora. Slowly, wonderfully for them,
heaven bent in these dying days of the year and kissed the earth, and
the tremor thrilled all lands and seas. Everything was good, all things
were happy, and these two were happiest of all. Out of the shadows and
hesitations of childhood they had stepped suddenly into manhood and
womanhood, with firm feet and uplifted heads. All the day that was
theirs they worked, picking the Silver Fleece--picking it tenderly and
lovingly from off the brown and spent bodies which had so utterly
yielded life and beauty to the full fruition of this long and silken
tendril, this white beauty of the cotton. November came and flew, and
still the unexhausted field yielded its frothing fruit.

Today seemed doubly glorious, for Bles had spoken of their marriage;
with twined hands and arms, and lips ever and again seeking their mates,
they walked the leafy way.

Unconscious, rapt, they stepped out into the Big Road skirting the edge
of the swamp. Why not? Was it not the King's Highway? And Love was King.
So they talked on, unknowing that far up the road the Cresswell coaches
were wheeling along with precious burdens. In the first carriage were
Mrs. Grey and Mrs. Vanderpool, Mr. Cresswell and Miss Taylor. Mrs.
Vanderpool was lolling luxuriously, but Mrs. Grey was a little stiff
from long travel and sat upright. Mr. Cresswell looked clean-cut and
handsome, and Miss Taylor seemed complacent and responsible. The dying
of the day soothed them all insensibly. Groups of dark little children
passed them as they neared the school, staring with wide eyes and
greeting timidly.

"There seems to be marrying and giving in marriage," laughed Mrs.
Vanderpool.

"Not very much," said Mr. Cresswell drily.

"Well, at least plenty of children."

"Plenty."

"But where are the houses?" asked Mrs. Grey.

"Perhaps in the swamp," said Mrs. Vanderpool lightly, looking up at the
sombre trees that lined the left.

"They live where they please and do as they please," Cresswell
explained; to which Mrs. Vanderpool added: "Like other animals."

Mary Taylor opened her lips to rebuke this levity when suddenly the
coachman called out and the horses swerved, and the carriage's four
occupants faced a young man and a young woman embracing heartily.

Out through the wood Bles and Zora had come to the broad red road;
playfully he celebrated all her beauty unconscious of time and place.

"You are tall and bend like grasses on the swamp," he said.

"And yet look up to you," she murmured.

"Your eyes are darkness dressed in night."

"To see you brighter, dear," she said.

"Your little hands are much too frail for work."

"They must grow larger, then, and soon."

"Your feet are far too small to travel on."

"They'll travel on to you--that's far enough."

"Your lips--your full and purple lips--were made alone for kissing, not
for words."

"They'll do for both."

He laughed in utter joy and touched her hair with light caressing hands.

"It does not fly with sunlight," she said quickly, with an upward
glance.

"No," he answered. "It sits and listens to the night."

But even as she nestled to him happily there came the harsh thunder of
horses' hoofs, beating on their ears. He drew her quickly to him in
fear, and the coach lurched and turned, and left them facing four pairs
of eyes. Miss Taylor reddened; Mrs. Grey looked surprised; Mrs.
Vanderpool smiled; but Mr. Cresswell darkened with anger. The couple
unclasped shamefacedly, and the young man, lifting his hat, started to
stammer an apology; but Cresswell interrupted him:

"Keep your--your philandering to the woods, or I shall have you
arrested," he said slowly, his face colorless, his lips twitching with
anger. "Drive on, John."

Miss Taylor felt that her worst suspicions had been confirmed; but Mrs.
Vanderpool was curious as to the cause of Cresswell's anger. It was so
genuine that it needed explanation.

"Are kisses illegal here?" she asked before the horses started, turning
the battery of her eyes full upon him. But Cresswell had himself well in
hand.

"No," he said. "But the girl is--notorious."

On the lovers the words fell like a blow. Zora shivered, and a grayish
horror mottled the dark burning of her face. Bles started in anger, then
paused in shivering doubt. What had happened? They knew not; yet
involuntarily their hands fell apart; they avoided each other's eyes.

"I--I must go now," gasped Zora, as the carriage swept away.

He did not hold her, he did not offer the farewell kiss, but stood
staring at the road as she walked into the swamp. A moment she paused
and looked back; then slowly, almost painfully, she took the path back
to the field of the Fleece, and reaching it after long, long minutes,
began mechanically to pick the cotton. But the cotton glowed crimson in
the failing sun.

Bles walked toward the school. What had happened? he kept asking. And
yet he dared not question the awful shape that sat somewhere, cold and
still, behind his soul. He heard the hoofs of horses again. It was Miss
Taylor being brought back to the school to greet Miss Smith and break
the news of the coming of the party. He raised his hat. She did not
return the greeting, but he found her pausing at the gate. It seemed to
her too awful for this foolish fellow thus to throw himself away. She
faced him and he flinched as from some descending blow.

"Bles," she said primly, "have you absolutely no shame?"

He braced himself and raised his head proudly.

"I am going to marry her; it is no crime." Then he noted the expression
on her face, and paused.

She stepped back, scandalized.

"Can it be, Bles Alwyn," she said, "that you don't know the sort of girl
she is?"

He raised his hands and warded off her words, dumbly, as she turned to
go, almost frightened at the havoc she saw. The heavens flamed scarlet
in his eyes and he screamed.

"It's a lie! It's a damned lie!" He wheeled about and tore into the
swamp.

"It's a damned lie!" he shouted to the trees. "Is it?--is it?" chirped
the birds. "It's a cruel falsehood!" he moaned. "Is it?--is it?"
whispered the devils within.

It seemed to him as though suddenly the world was staggering and
faltering about him. The trees bent curiously and strange breathings
were upon the breezes. He unbuttoned his collar that he might get more
air. A thousand things he had forgotten surged suddenly to life. Slower
and slower he ran, more and more the thoughts crowded his head. He
thought of that first red night and the yelling and singing and wild
dancing; he thought of Cresswell's bitter words; he thought of Zora
telling how she stayed out nights; he thought of the little bower that
he had built her in the cotton field. A wild fear struggled with his
anger, but he kept repeating, "No, no," and then, "At any rate, she will
tell me the truth." She had never lied to him; she would not dare; he
clenched his hands, murder in his heart.

Slowly and more slowly he ran. He knew where she was--where she must be,
waiting. And yet as he drew near huge hands held him back, and heavy
weights clogged his feet. His heart said: "On! quick! She will tell the
truth, and all will be well." His mind said: "Slow, slow; this is the
end." He hurled the thought aside, and crashed through the barrier.

She was standing still and listening, with a huge basket of the piled
froth of the field upon her head. One long brown arm, tender with
curvings, balanced the cotton; the other, poised, balanced the slim
swaying body. Bending she listened, her eyes shining, her lips apart,
her bosom fluttering at the well-known step.

He burst into her view with the fury of a beast, rending the wood away
and trampling the underbrush, reeling and muttering until he saw her.
She looked at him. Her hands dropped, she stood very still with drawn
face, grayish-brown, both hands unconsciously out-stretched, and the
cotton swaying, while deep down in her eyes, dimly, slowly, a horror lit
and grew. He paused a moment, then came slowly onward doggedly,
drunkenly, with torn clothes, flying collar, and red eyes. Then he
paused again, still beyond arm's-length, looking at her with fear-struck
eyes. The cotton on her head shivered and dropped in a pure mass of
white and silvery snow about her limbs. Her hands fell limply and the
horror flamed in her wet eyes. He struggled with his voice but it grated
and came hoarse and hard from his quivering throat.

"Zora!"

"Yes, Bles."

"You--you told me--you were--pure."

She was silent, but her body went all a-tremble. He stepped forward
until she could almost touch him; there standing straight and tall he
glared down upon her.

"Answer me," he whispered in a voice hard with its tight held sobs. A
misery darkened her face and the light died from her eyes, yet she
looked at him bravely and her voice came low and full as from afar.

"I asked you what it meant to be pure, Bles, and--and you told--and I
told you the truth."

"What it meant!--what it meant!" he repeated in the low, tense anguish.


"But--but, Bles--" She faltered; there came an awful pleading in her
eyes; her hand groped toward him; but he stepped slowly back--"But,
Bles--you said--willingly--you said--if--if she knew--"

He thundered back in livid anger:

"Knew! All women know! You should have _died_!"

Sobs were rising and shaking her from head to foot, but she drove them
back and gripped her breasts with her hands.

"No, Bles--no--all girls do not know. I was a child. Not since I knew
you, Bles--never, never since I saw you."

"Since--since," he groaned--"Christ! But before?"

"Yes, before."

"My God!"

She knew the end had come. Yet she babbled on tremblingly:

"He was our master, and all the other girls that gathered there did his
will; I--I--" she choked and faltered, and he drew farther away--"I
began running away, and they hunted me through the swamps. And
then--then I reckon I'd have gone back and been--as they all are--but
you came, Bles--you came, and you--you were a new great thing in my
life, and--and--yet, I was afraid I was not worthy until you--you said
the words. I thought you knew, and I thought that--that purity was just
wanting to be pure."

He ground his teeth in fury. Oh, he was an innocent--a blind baby--the
joke and laughing-stock of the country around, with yokels grinning at
him and pale-faced devils laughing aloud. The teachers knew; the girls
knew; God knew; everybody but he knew--poor blind, deaf mole, stupid
jackass that he was. He must run--run away from this world, and far off
in some free land beat back this pain.

Then in sheer weariness the anger died within his soul, leaving but
ashes and despair. Slowly he turned away, but with a quick motion she
stood in his path.

"Bles," she cried, "how can I grow pure?"

He looked at her listlessly.

"Never--never again," he slowly answered her.

Dark fear swept her drawn face.

"Never?" she gasped.

Pity surged and fought in his breast; but one thought held and burned
him. He bent to her fiercely:

"Who?" he demanded.

She pointed toward the Cresswell Oaks, and he turned away. She did not
attempt to stop him again, but dropped her hands and stared drearily up
into the clear sky with its shining worlds.

"Good-bye, Bles," she said slowly. "I thank God he gave you to me--just
a little time." She hesitated and waited. There came no word as the man
moved slowly away. She stood motionless. Then slowly he turned and came
back. He laid his hand a moment, lightly, upon her head.

"Good-bye--Zora," he sobbed, and was gone.

She did not look up, but knelt there silent, dry-eyed, till the last
rustle of his going died in the night. And then, like a waiting storm,
the torrent of her grief swept down upon her; she stretched herself upon
the black and fleece-strewn earth, and writhed.




_Sixteen_

THE GREAT REFUSAL


All night Miss Smith lay holding the quivering form of Zora close to her
breast, staring wide-eyed into the darkness--thinking, thinking. In the
morning the party would come. There would be Mrs. Grey and Mary Taylor,
Mrs. Vanderpool, who had left her so coldly in the lurch before, and
some of the Cresswells. They would come well fed and impressed with the
charming hospitality of their hosts, and rather more than willing to see
through those host's eyes. They would be in a hurry to return to some
social function, and would give her work but casual attention.

It seemed so dark an ending to so bright a dream. Never for her had a
fall opened as gloriously. The love of this boy and girl, blossoming as
it had beneath her tender care, had been a sacred, wonderful history
that revived within her memories of long-forgotten days. But above lay
the vision of her school, redeemed and enlarged, its future safe, its
usefulness broadened--small wonder that to Sarah Smith the future had
seemed in November almost golden.

Then things began to go wrong. The transfer of the Tolliver land had not
yet been effected; the money was ready, but Mr. Tolliver seemed busy or
hesitating. Next came this news of Mrs. Grey's probable conditions. So
here it was Christmas time, and Sarah Smith's castles lay almost in
ruins about her.

The girl moaned in her fitful sleep and Miss Smith soothed her. Poor
child! here too was work--a strange strong soul cruelly stricken in her
youth. Could she be brought back to a useful life? How she needed such a
strong, clear-eyed helper in this crisis of her work! Would Zora make
one or would this blow send her to perdition? Not if Sarah Smith could
save her, she resolved, and stared out the window where the pale red
dawn was sending its first rays on the white-pillared mansion of the
Cresswells.

Mrs. Grey saw the light on the columns, too, as she lay lazily in her
soft white bed. There was a certain delicious languor in the late
lingering fall of Alabama that suited her perfectly. Then, too, she
liked the house and its appointments; there was not, to be sure, all the
luxury that she was used to in her New York mansion, but there was a
certain finish about it, an elegance and staid old-fashioned hospitality
that appealed to her tremendously. Mrs. Grey's heart warmed to the sight
of Helen in her moments of spasmodic caring for the sick and afflicted
on the estate. No better guardian of her philanthropies could be found
than these same Cresswells. She must, of course, go over and see dear
Sarah Smith; but really there was not much to say or to look at.

The prospects seemed most alluring. Later, Mr. Easterly talked a while
on routine business, saying, as he turned away:

"I am more and more impressed, Mrs. Grey, with your wisdom in placing
large investments in the South. With peaceful social conditions the
returns will be large."

Mrs. Grey heard this delicate flattery complacently. She had her streak
of thrift, and wanted her business capacity recognized. She listened
attentively.

"For this reason, I trust you will handle your Negro philanthropies
judicially, as I know you will. There's dynamite in this race problem
for amateur reformers, but fortunately you have at hand wise and
sympathetic advisers in the Cresswells."

Mrs. Grey agreed entirely.

Mary Taylor, alone of the committee, took her commission so seriously as
to be anxious to begin work.

"We are to visit the school this morning, you know," she reminded the
others, looking at her watch; "I'm afraid we're late already."

The remark created mild consternation. It seemed that Mr. Vanderpool had
gone hunting and his wife had not yet arisen. Dr. Boldish was very
hoarse, Mr. Easterly was going to look over some plantations with
Colonel Cresswell, and Mr. Bocombe was engrossed in a novel.

"Clever, but not true to life," he said.

Finally the clergyman and Mr. Bocombe, Mrs. Grey and Mrs. Vanderpool and
Miss Taylor started for the school, with Harry Cresswell, about an hour
after lunch. The delay and suppressed excitement among the little folks
had upset things considerably there, but at the sight of the visitors at
the gate Miss Smith rang the bell.

The party came in, laughing and chatting. They greeted Miss Smith
cordially. Dr. Boldish was beginning to tell a good story when a silence
fell.

The children had gathered, quietly, almost timidly, and before the
distinguished company realized it, they turned to meet that battery of
four hundred eyes. A human eye is a wonderful thing when it simply waits
and watches. Not one of these little things alone would have been worth
more than a glance, but together, they became mighty, portentous. Mr.
Bocombe got out his note-book and wrote furiously therein. Dr. Boldish,
naturally the appointed spokesman, looked helplessly about and whispered
to Mrs. Vanderpool:

"What on earth shall I talk about?"

"The brotherhood of man?" suggested the lady.

"Hardly advisable," returned Dr. Boldish, seriously, "in our friend's
presence,"--with a glance toward Cresswell. Then he arose.

"My friends," he said, touching his finger-tips and using blank verse in
A minor. "This is an auspicious day. You should be thankful for the
gifts of the Lord. His bounty surrounds you--the trees, the fields, the
glorious sun. He gives cotton to clothe you, corn to eat, devoted
friends to teach you. Be joyful. Be good. Above all, be thrifty and save
your money, and do not complain and whine at your apparent
disadvantages. Remember that God did not create men equal but unequal,
and set metes and bounds. It is not for us to question the wisdom of the
Almighty, but to bow humbly to His will.

"Remember that the slavery of your people was not necessarily a crime.
It was a school of work and love. It gave you noble friends, like Mr.
Cresswell here." A restless stirring, and the battery of eyes was turned
upon that imperturbable gentleman, as if he were some strange animal.
"Love and serve them. Remember that we get, after all, little education
from books; rather in the fields, at the plough and in the kitchen. Let
your ambition be to serve rather than rule, to be humble followers of
the lowly Jesus."

With an upward glance the Rev. Dr. Boldish sat down amid a silence a
shade more intense than that which had greeted him. Then slowly from the
far corner rose a thin voice, tremulously. It wavered on the air and
almost broke, then swelled in sweet, low music. Other and stronger
voices gathered themselves to it, until two hundred were singing a soft
minor wail that gripped the hearts and tingled in the ears of the
hearers. Mr. Bocombe groped with a puzzled expression to find the pocket
for his note-book; Harry Cresswell dropped his eyes, and on Mrs.
Vanderpool's lips the smile died. Mary Taylor flushed, and Mrs. Grey
cried frankly:

"Poor things!" she whispered.

"Now," said Mrs. Grey, turning about, "we haven't but just a moment and
we want to take a little look at your work." She smiled graciously upon
Miss Smith.

Mrs. Grey thought the cooking-school very nice.

"I suppose," she said, "that you furnish cooks for the county."

"Largely," said Miss Smith. Mrs. Vanderpool looked surprised, but Miss
Smith added: "This county, you know, is mostly black." Mrs. Grey did not
catch the point.

The dormitories were neat and the ladies expressed great pleasure in
them.

"It is certainly nice for them to know what a clean place is," commented
Mrs. Grey. Mr. Cresswell, however, looked at a bath-room and smiled.

"How practical!" he said.

"Can you not stop and see some of the classes?" Sarah Smith knew in her
heart that the visit was a failure, still she would do her part to the
end.

"I doubt if we shall have time," Mrs. Grey returned, as they walked on.
"Mr. Cresswell expects friends to dinner."

"What a magnificent intelligence office," remarked Mr. Bocombe, "for
furnishing servants to the nation. I saw splendid material for cooks and
maids."

"And plough-boys," added Cresswell.

"And singers," said Mary Taylor.

"Well, now that's just my idea," said Mrs. Grey, "that these schools
should furnish trained servants and laborers for the South. Isn't that
your idea, Miss Smith?"

"Not exactly," the lady replied, "or at least I shouldn't put it just
that way. My idea is that this school should furnish men and women who
can work and earn an honest living, train up families aright, and
perform their duties as fathers, mothers, and citizens."

"Yes--yes, precisely," said Mrs. Grey, "that's what I meant."

"I think the whites can attend to the duties of citizenship without
help," observed Mr. Cresswell.

"Don't let the blacks meddle in politics," said Dr. Boldish.

"I want to make these children full-fledged men and women, strong,
self-reliant, honest, without any 'ifs' and 'ands' to their
development," insisted Miss Smith.

"Of course, and that is just what Mr. Cresswell wants. Isn't it, Mr.
Cresswell?" asked Mrs. Grey.

"I think I may say yes," Mr. Cresswell agreed. "I certainly want these
people to develop as far as they can, although Miss Smith and I would
differ as to their possibilities. But it is not so much in the general
theory of Negro education as in its particular applications where our
chief differences would lie. I may agree that a boy should learn higher
arithmetic, yet object to his loafing in plough-time. I might want to
educate some girls but not girls like Zora."

Mrs. Vanderpool glanced at Mr. Cresswell, smiling to herself.

Mrs. Grey broke in, beaming:

"That's just it, dear Miss Smith,--just it. Your heart is good, but you
need strong practical advice. You know we weak women are so impractical,
as my poor Job so often said. Now, I'm going to arrange to endow this
school with at least--at least a hundred and fifty thousand dollars. One
condition is that my friend, Mr. Cresswell here, and these other
gentlemen, including sound Northern business men like Mr. Easterly,
shall hold this money in trust, and expend it for your school as they
think best."

"Mr. Cresswell would be their local representative?" asked Miss Smith
slowly with white face.

"Why yes--yes, of course."

There was a long, tense silence. Then the firm reply,

"Mrs. Grey, I thank you, but I cannot accept your offer."

Sarah Smith's voice was strong, the tremor had left her hands. She had
expected something like this, of course; yet when it came--somehow it
failed to stun. She would not turn over the direction of the school, or
the direction of the education of these people, to those who were most
opposed to their education. Therefore, there was no need to hesitate;
there was no need to think the thing over--she had thought it over--and
she looked into Mrs. Grey's eyes and with gathering tears in her own
said:

"Again, I thank you very much, Mrs. Grey."

Mrs. Grey was a picture of the most emphatic surprise, and Mr. Cresswell
moved to the window. Mrs. Grey looked helplessly at her companions.

"But--I don't understand, Miss Smith--why can't you accept my offer?"

"Because you ask me to put my school in control of those who do not wish
for the best interests of black folk, and in particular I object to Mr.
Cresswell," said Miss Smith, slowly but very distinctly, "because his
relation to the forces of evil in this community has been such that he
can direct no school of mine." Mrs. Vanderpool moved toward the door and
Mr. Cresswell bowing slightly followed. Dr. Boldish looked indignant and
Mr. Bocombe dove after his note-book. Mary Taylor, her head in a whirl,
came forward. She felt that in some way she was responsible for this
dreadful situation and she wanted desperately to save matters from final
disaster.

"Come," she said, "Mrs. Grey, we'll talk this matter over again later. I
am sure Miss Smith does not mean quite all she says--she is tired and
nervous. You join the others and don't wait for me and I will be along
directly."

Mrs. Grey was only too glad to escape and Mr. Bocombe got a chance to
talk. He drew out his note-book.

"Awfully interesting," he said, "awfully. Now--er--let's see--oh, yes.
Did you notice how unhealthy the children looked? Race is undoubtedly
dying out; fact. No hope. Weak. No spontaneity either--rather languid,
did you notice? Yes, and their heads--small and narrow--no brain
capacity. They can't concentrate; notice how some slept when Dr. Boldish
was speaking? Mr. Cresswell says they own almost no land here; think of
it? This land was worth only ten dollars an acre a decade ago, he says.
Negroes might have bought all and been rich. Very shiftless--and that
singing. Now, I wonder where they got the music? Imitation, of course."
And so he rattled on, noting not the silence of the others.

As the carriage drove off Mary turned to Miss Smith.

"Now, Miss Smith," she began--but Miss Smith looked at her, and said
sternly, "Sit down."

Mary Taylor sat down. She had been so used to lecturing the older woman
that the sudden summoning of her well known sternness against herself
took her breath, and she sat awkwardly like the school girl that she was
waiting for Miss Smith to speak. She felt suddenly very young and very
helpless--she who had so jauntily set out to solve this mighty problem
by a waving of her wand. She saw with a swelling of pity the drawn and
stricken face of her old friend and she started up.

"Sit down," repeated Miss Smith harshly. "Mary Taylor, you are a fool.
You are not foolish, for the foolish learn; you are simply a fool. You
will never learn; you have blundered into this life work of mine and
well nigh ruined it. Whether I can yet save it God alone knows. You have
blundered into the lives of two loving children, and sent one wandering
aimless on the face of the earth and the other moaning in yonder chamber
with death in her heart. You are going to marry the man that sought
Zora's ruin when she was yet a child because you think of his
aristocratic pose and pretensions built on the poverty, crime, and
exploitation of six generations of serfs. You'll marry him and--"

But Miss Taylor leapt to her feet with blazing cheeks.

"How dare you?" she screamed, beside herself.

"But God in heaven help you if you do," finished Miss Smith, calmly.




_Seventeen_

THE RAPE OF THE FLEECE


When slowly from the torpor of ether, one wakens to the misty sense of
eternal loss, and there comes the exquisite prick of pain, then one
feels in part the horror of the ache when Zora wakened to the world
again. The awakening was the work of days and weeks. At first in sheer
exhaustion, physical and mental, she lay and moaned. The sense of
loss--of utter loss--lay heavy upon her. Something of herself, something
dearer than self, was gone from her forever, and an infinite loneliness
and silence, as of endless years, settled on her soul. She wished
neither food nor words, only to be alone. Then gradually the pain of
injury stung her when the blood flowed fuller. As Miss Smith knelt
beside her one night to make her simple prayer Zora sat suddenly
upright, white-swathed, dishevelled, with fury in her midnight eyes.

"I want no prayers!" she cried, "I will not pray! He is no God of mine.
He isn't fair. He knows and won't tell. He takes advantage of us--He
works and fools us." All night Miss Smith heard mutterings of this
bitterness, and the next day the girl walked her room like a
tigress,--to and fro, to and fro, all the long day. Toward night a dumb
despair settled upon her. Miss Smith found her sitting by the window
gazing blankly toward the swamp. She came to Miss Smith, slowly, and put
her hands upon her shoulders with almost a caress.

"You must forgive me," she pleaded plaintively. "I reckon I've been
mighty bad with you, and you always so good to me; but--but, you see--it
hurts so."

"I know it hurts, dear; I know it does. But men and women must learn to
bear hurts in this world."

"Not hurts like this; they couldn't."

"Yes, even hurts like this. Bear and stand straight; be brave. After
all, Zora, no man is quite worth a woman's soul; no love is worth a
whole life."

Zora turned away with a gesture of impatience.

"You were born in ice," she retorted, adding a bit more tenderly, "in
clear strong ice; but I was born in fire. I live--I love; that's all."
And she sat down again, despairingly, and stared at the dull swamp. Miss
Smith stood for a moment and closed her eyes upon a vision.

"Ice!" she whispered. "My God!"

Then, at length, she said to Zora:

"Zora, there's only one way: do something; if you sit thus brooding
you'll go crazy."

"Do crazy folks forget?"

"Nonsense, Zora!" Miss Smith ridiculed the girl's fantastic vagaries;
her sound common sense rallied to her aid. "They are the people who
remember; sane folk forget. Work is the only cure for such pain."

"But there's nothing to do--nothing I want to do--nothing worth
doing--now."

"The Silver Fleece?"

The girl sat upright.

"The Silver Fleece," she murmured. Without further word, slowly she
arose and walked down the stairs, and out into the swamp. Miss Smith
watched her go; she knew that every step must be the keen prickle of
awakening flesh. Yet the girl walked steadily on.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was the Christmas--not Christmas-tide of the North and West, but
Christmas of the Southern South. It was not the festival of the Christ
Child, but a time of noise and frolic and license, the great Pay-Day of
the year when black men lifted their heads from a year's toiling in the
earth, and, hat in hand, asked anxiously: "Master, what have I earned?
Have I paid my old debts to you? Have I made my clothes and food? Have I
got a little of the year's wage coming to me?" Or, more carelessly and
cringingly: "Master, gimme a Christmas gift."

The lords of the soil stood round, gauging their cotton, measuring their
men. Their stores were crowded, their scales groaned, their gins sang.
In the long run public opinion determines all wage, but in more
primitive times and places, private opinion, personal judgment of some
man in power, determines. The Black Belt is primitive and the landlord
wields the power.

"What about Johnson?" calls the head clerk.

"Well, he's a faithful nigger and needs encouragement; cancel his debt
and give him ten dollars for Christmas." Colonel Cresswell glowed, as if
he were full of the season's spirit.

"And Sanders?"

"How's his cotton?"

"Good, and a lot of it."

"He's trying to get away. Keep him in debt, but let him draw what he
wants."

"Aunt Rachel?"

"H'm, they're way behind, aren't they? Give her a couple of dollars--not
a cent more."

"Jim Sykes?"

"Say, Harry, how about that darky, Sykes?" called out the Colonel.

Excusing himself from his guests, Harry Cresswell came into the office.

To them this peculiar spectacle of the market place was of unusual
interest. They saw its humor and its crowding, its bizarre effects and
unwonted pageantry. Black giants and pigmies were there; kerchiefed
aunties, giggling black girls, saffron beauties, and loafing white men.
There were mules and horses and oxen, wagons and buggies and carts; but
above all and in all, rushing through, piled and flying, bound and
baled--was cotton. Cotton was currency; cotton was merchandise; cotton
was conversation.

All this was "beautiful" to Mrs. Grey and "unusually interesting" to
Mrs. Vanderpool. To Mary Taylor it had the fascination of a puzzle whose
other side she had already been partially studying. She was particularly
impressed with the joy and abandon of the scene--light laughter, huge
guffaws, handshakes, and gossipings.

"At all events," she concluded, "this is no oppressed people." And
sauntering away from the rest she noted the smiles of an undersized
smirking yellow man who hurried by with a handful of dollar bills. At a
side entrance liquor was evidently on sale--men were drinking and women,
too; some were staggering, others cursing, and yet others singing. Then
suddenly a man swung around the corner swearing in bitter rage:

"The damned thieves, they'se stole a year's work--the white--" But some
one called, "Hush up, Sanders! There's a white woman." And he threw a
startled look at Mary and hurried by. She was perplexed and upset and
stood hesitating a moment when she heard a well-known voice:

"Why, Miss Taylor, I was alarmed for you; you really must be careful
about trusting yourself with these half drunken Negroes."

"Wouldn't it be better not to give them drink, Mr. Cresswell?"

"And let your neighbor sell them poison at all hours? No, Miss Taylor."
They joined the others, and all were turning toward the carriage when a
figure coming down the road attracted them.

"Quite picturesque," observed Mrs. Vanderpool, looking at the tall, slim
girl swaying toward them with a piled basket of white cotton poised
lightly on her head. "Why," in abrupt recognition, "it is our Venus of
the Roadside, is it not?"

Mary saw it was Zora. Just then, too, Zora caught sight of them, and for
a moment hesitated, then came on; the carriage was in front of the
store, and she was bound for the store. A moment Mary hesitated, too,
and then turned resolutely to greet her. But Zora's eyes did not see
her. After one look at that sorrow-stricken face, Mary turned away.

Colonel Cresswell stood by the door, his hat on, his hands in his
pockets.

"Well, Zora, what have you there?" he asked.

"Cotton, sir."

Harry Cresswell bent over it.

"Great heavens! Look at this cotton!" he ejaculated. His father
approached. The cotton lay in silken handfuls, clean and shimmering,
with threads full two inches long. The idlers, black and white,
clustered round, gazing at it, and fingering it with repeated
exclamations of astonishment.

"Where did this come from?" asked the Colonel sharply. He and Harry were
both eying the girl intently.

"I raised it in the swamp," Zora replied quietly, in a dead voice. There
was no pride of achievement in her manner, no gladness; all that had
flown.

"Is that all?"

"No, sir; I think there's two bales."

"Two bales! Where is it? How the devil--" The Colonel was forgetting his
guests, but Harry intervened.

"You'll need to get it picked right off," he suggested.

"It's all picked, sir."

"But where is it?"

"If you'll send a wagon, sir--"

But the Colonel hardly waited.

"Here you, Jim, take the big mules and drive like--Where's that wench?"

But Zora was already striding on ahead, and was far up the red road when
the great mules galloped into sight and the long whip snapped above
their backs. The Colonel was still excited.

"That cotton must be ours, Harry--all of it. And see that none is
stolen. We've got no contract with the wench, so don't dally with her."
But Harry said firmly, quietly:

"It's fine cotton, and she raised it; she must be paid well for it."
Colonel Cresswell glanced at him with something between contempt and
astonishment on his face.

"You go along with the ladies," Harry added; "I'll see to this cotton."
Mary Taylor's smile had rewarded him; now he must get rid of his
company--before Zora returned.

It was dark when the cotton came; such a load as Cresswell's store had
never seen before. Zora watched it weighed, received the cotton checks,
and entered the store. Only the clerk was there, and he was closing. He
pointed her carelessly to the office in the back part. She went into the
small dim room, and laying the cotton-check on the desk, stood waiting.
Slowly the hopelessness and bitterness of it all came back in a great
whelming flood. What was the use of trying for anything? She was lost
forever. The world was against her, and again she saw the fingers of
Elspeth--the long black claw-like talons that clutched and dragged her
down--down. She did not struggle--she dropped her hands listlessly,
wearily, and stood but half conscious as the door opened and Mr. Harry
Cresswell entered the dimly lighted room. She opened her eyes. She had
expected his father. Somewhere way down in the depths of her nature the
primal tiger awoke and snarled. She was suddenly alive from hair to
finger tip. Harry Cresswell paused a second and swept her full length
with his eye--her profile, the long supple line of bosom and hip, the
little foot. Then he closed the door softly and walked slowly toward
her. She stood like stone, without a quiver; only her eye followed the
crooked line of the Cresswell blue blood on his marble forehead as she
looked down from her greater height; her hand closed almost caressingly
on a rusty poker lying on the stove nearby; and as she sensed the hot
breath of him she felt herself purring in a half heard whisper.

"I should not like--to kill you."

He looked at her long and steadily as he passed to his desk. Slowly he
lighted a cigarette, opened the great ledger, and compared the
cotton-check with it.

"Three thousand pounds," he announced in a careless tone. "Yes, that
will make about two bales of lint. It's extra cotton--say fifteen cents
a pound--one hundred fifty dollars--seventy-five dollars to you--h'm."
He took a note-book out of his pocket, pushed his hat back on his head,
and paused to relight his cigarette.

"Let's see--your rent and rations--"

"Elspeth pays no rent," she said slowly, but he did not seem to hear.

"Your rent and rations with the five years' back debt,"--he made a hasty
calculation--"will be one hundred dollars. That leaves you twenty-five
in our debt. Here's your receipt."

The blow had fallen. She did not wince nor cry out. She took the
receipt, calmly, and walked out into the darkness.

They had stolen the Silver Fleece.

What should she do? She never thought of appeal to courts, for Colonel
Cresswell was Justice of the Peace and his son was bailiff. Why had they
stolen from her? She knew. She was now penniless, and in a sense
helpless. She was now a peon bound to a master's bidding. If Elspeth
chose to sign a contract of work for her to-morrow, it would mean
slavery, jail, or hounded running away. What would Elspeth do? One never
knew. Zora walked on. An hour ago it seemed that this last blow must
have killed her. But now it was different. Into her first despair had
crept, in one fierce moment, grim determination. Somewhere in the world
sat a great dim Injustice which had veiled the light before her young
eyes, just as she raised them to the morning. With the veiling, death
had come into her heart.

And yet, they should not kill her; they should not enslave her. A
desperate resolve to find some way up toward the light, if not to it,
formed itself within her. She would not fall into the pit opening before
her. Somehow, somewhere lay The Way. She must never fall lower; never be
utterly despicable in the eyes of the man she had loved. There was no
dream of forgiveness, of purification, of re-kindled love; all these she
placed sadly and gently into the dead past. But in awful earnestness,
she turned toward the future; struggling blindly, groping in half formed
plans for a way.

She came thus into the room where sat Miss Smith, strangely pallid
beneath her dusky skin. But there lay a light in her eyes.




_Eighteen_

THE COTTON CORNER


All over the land the cotton had foamed in great white flakes under the
winter sun. The Silver Fleece lay like a mighty mantle across the earth.
Black men and mules had staggered beneath its burden, while deep songs
welled in the hearts of men; for the Fleece was goodly and gleaming and
soft, and men dreamed of the gold it would buy. All the roads in the
country had been lined with wagons--a million wagons speeding to and fro
with straining mules and laughing black men, bearing bubbling masses of
piled white Fleece. The gins were still roaring and spitting flames and
smoke--fifty thousand of them in town and vale. Then hoarse iron throats
were filled with fifteen billion pounds of white-fleeced, black-specked
cotton, for the whirling saws to tear out the seed and fling five
thousand million pounds of the silken fibre to the press.

And there again the black men sang, like dark earth-spirits flitting in
twilight; the presses creaked and groaned; closer and closer they
pressed the silken fleece. It quivered, trembled, and then lay cramped,
dead, and still, in massive, hard, square bundles, tied with iron
strings. Out fell the heavy bales, thousand upon thousand, million upon
million, until they settled over the South like some vast dull-white
swarm of birds. Colonel Cresswell and his son, in these days, had a long
and earnest conversation perforated here and there by explosions of the
Colonel's wrath. The Colonel could not understand some things.

"They want us to revive the Farmers' League?" he fiercely demanded.


"Yes," Harry calmly replied.

"And throw the rest of our capital after the fifty thousand dollars
we've already lost?"

"Yes."

"And you were fool enough to consent--"

"Wait, Father--and don't get excited. Listen. Cotton is going up--"

"Of course it's going up! Short crop and big demand--"

"Cotton is going up, and then it's going to fall."

"I don't believe it."

"I know it; the trust has got money and credit enough to force it down."

"Well, what then?" The Colonel glared.

"Then somebody will corner it."

"The Farmers' League won't stand--"

"Precisely. The Farmers' League can do the cornering and hold it for
higher prices."

"Lord, son! if we only could!" groaned the Colonel.

"We can; we'll have unlimited credit."

"But--but--" stuttered the bewildered Colonel, "I don't understand. Why
should the trust--"

"Nonsense, Father--what's the use of understanding. Our advantage is
plain, and John Taylor guarantees the thing."

"Who's John Taylor?" snorted the Colonel. "Why should we trust him?"

"Well," said Harry slowly, "he wants to marry Helen--"

His father grew apopletic.

"I'm not saying he will, Father; I'm only saying that he wants to,"
Harry made haste to placate the rising tide of wrath.

"No Southern gentleman--" began the Colonel. But Harry shrugged his
shoulders.

"Which is better, to be crushed by the trust or to escape at their
expense, even if that escape involves unwarranted assumptions on the
part of one of them? I tell you, Father, the code of the Southern
gentleman won't work in Wall Street."

"And I'll tell you why--there _are_ no Southern gentlemen," growled his
father.

The Silver Fleece was golden, for its prices were flying aloft. Mr.
Caldwell told Colonel Cresswell that he confidently expected twelve-cent
cotton.

"The crop is excellent and small, scarcely ten million bales," he
declared. "The price is bound to go up."

Colonel Cresswell was hesitant, even doubtful; the demand for cotton at
high prices usually fell off rapidly and he had heard rumors of
curtailed mill production. While, then, he hoped for high prices he
advised the Farmers' League to be on guard.

Mr. Caldwell seemed to be right, for cotton rose to ten cents a
pound--ten and a half--eleven--and then the South began to see visions
and to dream dreams.

"Yes, my dear," said Mr. Maxwell, whose lands lay next to the
Cresswells' on the northwest, "yes, if cotton goes to twelve or thirteen
cents as seems probable, I think we can begin the New House"--for Mrs.
Maxwell's cherished dream was a pillared mansion like the Cresswells'.

Mr. Tolliver looked at his house and barns. "Well, daughter, if this
crop sells at twelve cents, I'll be on my feet again, and I won't have
to sell that land to the nigger school after all. Once out of the
clutch of the Cresswells--well, I think we can have a coat of paint."
And he laughed as he had not laughed in ten years.

Down in the bottoms west of the swamp a man and woman were figuring
painfully on an old slate. He was light brown and she was yellow.

"Honey," he said tremblingly, "I b'lieve we can do it--if cotton goes to
twelve cents, we can pay the mortgage."

Two miles north of the school an old black woman was shouting and waving
her arms. "If cotton goes to twelve cents we can pay out and be free!"
and she threw her apron over her head and wept, gathering her children
in her arms.

But even as she cried a flash and tremor shook the South. Far away to
the north a great spider sat weaving his web. The office looked down
from the clouds on lower Broadway, and was soft with velvet and leather.
Swift, silent messengers hurried in and out, and Mr. Easterly, deciding
the time was ripe, called his henchman to him.

"Taylor, we're ready--go South."

And John Taylor rose, shook hands silently, and went.

As he entered Cresswell's plantation store three days later, a colored
woman with a little boy turned sadly away from the counter.

"No, aunty," the clerk was telling her, "calico is too high; can't let
you have any till we see how your cotton comes out."

"I just wanted a bit; I promised the boy--"

"Go on, go on--Why, Mr. Taylor!" And the little boy burst into tears
while he was hurried out.

"Tightening up on the tenants?" asked Taylor.

"Yes; these niggers are mighty extravagant. Besides, cotton fell a
little today--eleven to ten and three-fourths; just a flurry, I reckon.
Had you heard?"

Mr. Taylor said he had heard, and he hurried on. Next morning the long
shining wires of that great Broadway web trembled and flashed again and
cotton went to ten cents.

"No house this year, I fear," quoth Mr. Maxwell, bitterly.

The next day nine and a half was the quotation, and men began to look at
each other and asked questions.

"Paper says the crop is larger than the government estimate," said
Tolliver, and added, "There'll be no painting this year." He looked
toward the Smith School and thought of the five thousand dollars
waiting; but he hesitated. John Taylor had carefully mentioned seven
thousand dollars as a price he was willing to pay and "perhaps more."
Was Cresswell back of Taylor? Tolliver was suspicious and moved to delay
matters.

"It's manipulation and speculation in New York," said Colonel Cresswell,
"and the Farmers' League must begin operations."

The local paper soon had an editorial on "our distinguished fellow
citizen, Colonel Cresswell," and his efforts to revive the Farmers'
League. It was understood that Colonel Cresswell was risking his whole
private fortune to hold the price of cotton, and some effort seemed to
be needed, for cotton dropped to nine cents within a week. Swift
negotiations ensued, and a meeting of the executive committee of the
Farmers' League was held in Montgomery. A system of warehouses and
warehouse certificates was proposed.

"But that will cost money," responded each of the dozen big landlords
who composed the committee; whereupon Harry Cresswell introduced John
Taylor, who represented thirty millions of Southern bank stock.

"I promise you credit to any reasonable amount," said Mr. Taylor, "I
believe in cotton--the present price is abnormal." And Mr. Taylor knew
whereof he spoke, for when he sent a cipher despatch North, cotton
dropped to eight and a half. The Farmers' League leased three warehouses
at Savannah, Montgomery, and New Orleans.

Then silently the South gripped itself and prepared for battle. Men
stopped spending, business grew dull, and millions of eyes were glued
to the blackboards of the cotton-exchange. Tighter and tighter the
reins grew on the backs of the black tenants.

"Miss Smith, is yo' got just a drap of coffee to lend me? Mr. Cresswell
won't give me none at the store and I'se just starving for some," said
Aunt Rachel from over the hill. "We won't git free this year, Miss
Smith, not this year," she concluded plaintively.

Cotton fell to seven and a half cents and the muttered protest became
angry denunciation. Why was it? Who was doing it?

Harry Cresswell went to Montgomery. He was getting nervous. The thing
was too vast. He could not grasp it. It set his head in a whirl. Harry
Cresswell was not a bad man--are there any bad men? He was a man who
from the day he first wheedled his black mammy into submission, down to
his thirty-sixth year, had seldom known what it was voluntarily to deny
himself or curb a desire. To rise when he would, eat what he craved, and
do what the passing fancy suggested had long been his day's programme.
Such emptiness of life and aim had to be filled, and it was filled; he
helped his father sometimes with the plantations, but he helped
spasmodically and played at work.

The unregulated fire of energy and delicacy of nervous poise within him
continually hounded him to the verge of excess and sometimes beyond.
Cool, quiet, and gentlemanly as he was by rule of his clan, the ice was
thin and underneath raged unappeased fires. He craved the madness of
alcohol in his veins till his delicate hands trembled of mornings. The
women whom he bent above in languid, veiled-eyed homage, feared lest
they love him, and what work was to others gambling was to him.

The Cotton Combine, then, appealed to him overpoweringly--to his passion
for wealth, to his passion for gambling. But once entered upon the game
it drove him to fear and frenzy: first, it was a long game and Harry
Cresswell was not trained to waiting, and, secondly, it was a game whose
intricacies he did not know. In vain did he try to study the matter
through. He ordered books from the North, he subscribed for financial
journals, he received special telegraphic reports only to toss them
away, curse his valet, and call for another brandy. After all, he kept
saying to himself, what guarantee, what knowledge had he that this was
not a "damned Yankee trick"?

Now that the web was weaving its last mesh in early January he haunted
Montgomery, and on this day when it seemed that things must culminate or
he would go mad, he hastened again down to the Planters' Hotel and was
quickly ushered to John Taylor's room. The place was filled with tobacco
smoke. An electric ticker was drumming away in one corner, a telephone
ringing on the desk, and messenger boys hovered outside the door and
raced to and fro.

"Well," asked Cresswell, maintaining his composure by an effort, "how
are things?"

"Great!" returned Taylor. "League holds three million bales and controls
five. It's the biggest corner in years."

"But how's cotton?"

"Ticker says six and three-fourths."

Cresswell sat down abruptly opposite Taylor, looking at him fixedly.

"That last drop means liabilities of a hundred thousand to us," he said
slowly.

"Exactly," Taylor blandly admitted.

Beads of sweat gathered on Cresswell's forehead. He looked at the
scrawny iron man opposite, who had already forgotten his presence. He
ordered whiskey, and taking paper and pencil began to figure, drinking
as he figured. Slowly the blood crept out of his white face leaving it
whiter, and went surging and pounding in his heart. Poverty--that was
what those figures spelled. Poverty--unclothed, wineless poverty, to dig
and toil like a "nigger" from morning until night, and to give up horses
and carriages and women; that was what they spelled.

"How much--farther will it drop?" he asked harshly.

Taylor did not look up.

"Can't tell," he said, "'fraid not much though." He glanced through a
telegram. "No--damn it!--outside mills are low; they'll stampede soon.
Meantime we'll buy."

"But, Taylor--"

"Here are one hundred thousand offered at six and three-fourths."

"I tell you, Taylor--" Cresswell half arose.

"Done!" cried Taylor. "Six and one-half," clicked the machine.

Cresswell arose from his chair by the window and came slowly to the wide
flat desk where Taylor was working feverishly. He sat down heavily in
the chair opposite and tried quietly to regain his self-control. The
liabilities of the Cresswells already amounted to half the value of
their property, at a fair market valuation. The cotton for which they
had made debts was still falling in value. Every fourth of a cent fall
meant--he figured it again tremblingly--meant one hundred thousand more
of liabilities. If cotton fell to six he hadn't a cent on earth. If it
stayed there--"My God!" He felt a faintness stealing over him but he
beat it back and gulped down another glass of fiery liquor.

Then the one protecting instinct of his clan gripped him. Slowly,
quietly his hand moved back until it grasped the hilt of the big Colt's
revolver that was ever with him--his thin white hand became suddenly
steady as it slipped the weapon beneath the shadow of the desk.

"If it goes to six," he kept murmuring, "we're ruined--if it goes to
six--if--"

"Tick," sounded the wheel and the sound reverberated like sudden thunder
in his ears. His hand was iron, and he raised it slightly. "Six," said
the wheel--his finger quivered--"and a half."

"Hell!" yelled Taylor. "She's turned--there'll be the devil to pay now."
A messenger burst in and Taylor scowled.

"She's loose in New York--a regular mob in New Orleans--and--hark!--By
God! there's something doing here. Damn it--I wish we'd got another
million bales. Let's see, we've got--" He figured while the wheel
whirred--"7--7-1/2--8--8-1/2."

Cresswell listened, staggered to his feet, his face crimson and his hair
wild.

"My God, Taylor," he gasped. "I'm--I'm a half a million ahead--great
heavens!"

The ticker whirred, "8-3/4--9--9-1/2--10." Then it stopped dead.

"Exchange closed," said Taylor. "We've cornered the market all
right--cornered it--d'ye hear, Cresswell? We got over half the crop and
we can send prices to the North Star--you--why, I figure it you
Cresswells are worth at least seven hundred and fifty thousand above
liabilities this minute," and John Taylor leaned back and lighted a big
black cigar.

"I've made a million or so myself," he added reflectively.

Cresswell leaned back in his chair, his face had gone white again, and
he spoke slowly to still the tremor in his voice.

"I've gambled--before; I've gambled on cards and on horses; I've
gambled--for money--and--women--but--"

"But not on cotton, hey? Well, I don't know about cards and such; but
they can't beat cotton."

"And say, John Taylor, you're my friend." Cresswell stretched his hand
across the desk, and as he bent forward the pistol crashed to the floor.




_Nineteen_

THE DYING OF ELSPETH


Rich! This was the thought that awakened Harry Cresswell to a sense of
endless well-being. Rich! No longer the mirage and semblance of wealth,
the memory of opulence, the shadow of homage without the substance of
power--no; now the wealth was real, cold hard dollars, and in piles. How
much? He laughed aloud as he turned on his pillow. What did he care?
Enough--enough. Not less than half a million; perhaps three-quarters of
a million; perhaps--was not cotton still rising?--a whole round million!
That would mean from twenty-five to fifty thousand a year. Great
heavens! and he'd been starving on a bare couple of thousand and trying
to keep up appearances! today the Cresswells were almost millionaires;
aye, and he might be married to more millions.

He sat up with a start. Today Mary was going North. He had quite
forgotten it in the wild excitement of the cotton corner. He had
neglected her. Of course, there was always the hovering doubt as to
whether he really wanted her or not. She had the form and carriage; her
beauty, while not startling, was young and fresh and firm. On the other
hand there was about her a certain independence that he did not like to
associate with women. She had thoughts and notions of the world which
were, to his Southern training, hardly feminine. And yet even they
piqued him and spurred him like the sight of an untrained colt. He had
not seen her falter yet beneath his glances or tremble at his touch. All
this he desired--ardently desired. But did he desire her as a wife? He
rather thought that he did. And if so he must speak today.

There was his father, too, to reckon with. Colonel Cresswell, with the
perversity of the simple-minded, had taken the sudden bettering of their
fortunes as his own doing. He had foreseen; he had stuck it out; his
credit had pulled the thing through; and the trust had learned a thing
or two about Southern gentlemen.

Toward John Taylor he perceptibly warmed. His business methods were such
as a Cresswell could never stoop to; but he was a man of his word, and
Colonel Cresswell's correspondence with Mr. Easterly opened his eyes to
the beneficent ideals of Northern capital. At the same time he could not
consider the Easterlys and the Taylors and such folk as the social
equals of the Cresswells, and his prejudice on this score must still be
reckoned with.

Below, Mary Taylor lingered on the porch in strange uncertainty. Harry
Cresswell would soon be coming downstairs. Did she want him to find her?
She liked him frankly, undisguisedly; but from the love she knew to be
so near her heart she recoiled in perturbation. He wooed her--whether
consciously or not, she was always uncertain--with every quiet
attention and subtle deference, with a devotion seemingly quite too
delicate for words; he not only fetched her flowers, but flowers that
chimed with day and gown and season--almost with mood. He had a woman's
premonitions in fulfilling her wishes. His hands, if they touched her,
were soft and tender, and yet he gave a curious impression of strength
and poise and will.

Indeed, in all things he was in her eyes a gentleman in the fine
old-fashioned aristocracy of the term; her own heart voiced all he did
not say, and pleaded for him to her own confusion.

And yet, in her heart, lay the awful doubt--and the words kept ringing
in her ears! "You will marry this man--but heaven help you if you do!"

So it was that on this day when she somehow felt he would speak, his
footsteps on the stairs filled her with sudden panic. Without a word she
slipped behind the pillars and ran down among the oaks and sauntered out
upon the big road. He caught the white flutter of her dress, and smiled
indulgently as he watched and waited and lightly puffed his cigarette.

The morning was splendid with that first delicious languor of the spring
which breathes over the Southland in February. Mary Taylor filled her
lungs, lifted her arms aloft, and turning, stepped into the deep shadow
of the swamp.

Abruptly the air, the day, the scene about her subtly changed. She felt
a closeness and a tremor, a certain brooding terror in the languid
sombre winds. The gold of the sunlight faded to a sickly green, and the
earth was black and burned. A moment she paused and looked back; she
caught the man's silhouette against the tall white pillars of the
mansion and she fled deeper into the forest with the hush of death about
her, and the silence which is one great Voice. Slowly, and mysteriously
it loomed before her--that squat and darksome cabin which seemed to
fitly set in the centre of the wilderness, beside its crawling slime.

She paused in sudden certainty that there lay the answer to her doubts
and mistrust. She felt impelled to go forward and ask--what? She did not
know, but something to still this war in her bosom. She had seldom seen
Elspeth; she had never been in her cabin. She had felt an inconquerable
aversion for the evil hag; she felt it now, and shivered in the warm
breeze.

As she came in full view of the door, she paused. On the step of the
cabin, framed in the black doorway, stood Zora. Measured by the squat
cabin she seemed in height colossal; slim, straight as a pine,
motionless, with one long outstretched arm pointing to where the path
swept onward toward the town.

It was too far for words but the scene lay strangely clear and sharp-cut
in the green mystery of the sunlight. Before that motionless, fateful
figure crouched a slighter, smaller woman, dishevelled, clutching her
breast; she bent and rose--hesitated--seemed to plead; then turning,
clasped in passionate embrace the child whose head was hid in Zora's
gown. Next instant she was staggering along the path whither Zora
pointed.

Slowly the sun was darkened, and plaintive murmurings pulsed through the
wood. The oppression and fear of the swamp redoubled in Mary Taylor.

Zora gave no sign of having seen her. She stood tall and still, and the
little golden-haired girl still sobbed in her gown. Mary Taylor looked
up into Zora's face, then paused in awe. It was a face she did not know;
it was neither the beautifully mischievous face of the girl, nor the
pain-stricken face of the woman. It was a face cold and mask-like,
regular and comely; clothed in a mighty calm, yet subtly, masterfully
veiling behind itself depths of unfathomed misery and wild revolt. All
this lay in its darkness.

"Good-morning, Miss Taylor."

Mary, who was wont to teach this woman--so lately a child--searched in
vain for words to address her now. She stood bare-haired and hesitating
in the pale green light of the darkened morning. It seemed fit that a
deep groan of pain should gather itself from the mysterious depths of
the swamp, and drop like a pall on the black portal of the cabin. But
it brought Mary Taylor back to a sense of things, and under a sudden
impulse she spoke.

"Is--is anything the matter?" she asked nervously.

"Elspeth is sick," replied Zora.

"Is she very sick?"

"Yes--she has been called," solemnly returned the dark young woman.

Mary was puzzled. "Called?" she repeated vaguely.

"We heard the great cry in the night, and Elspeth says it is the End."

It did not occur to Mary Taylor to question this mysticism; she all at
once understood--perhaps read the riddle in the dark, melancholy eyes
that so steadily regarded her.

"Then you can leave the place, Zora?" she exclaimed gladly.

"Yes, I could leave."

"And you will."

"I don't know."

"But the place looks--evil."

"It is evil."

"And yet you will stay?"

Zora's eyes were now fixed far above the woman's head, and she saw a
human face forming itself in the vast rafters of the forest. Its eyes
were wet with pain and anger.

"Perhaps," she answered.

The child furtively uncovered her face and looked at the stranger. She
was blue-eyed and golden-haired.

"Whose child is this?" queried Mary, curiously.

Zora looked coldly down upon the child.

"It is Bertie's. Her mother is bad. She is gone. I sent her. She and the
others like her."

"But where have you sent them?"

"To Hell!"

Mary Taylor started under the shock. Impulsively she moved forward with
hands that wanted to stretch themselves in appeal.

"Zora! Zora! _You_ mustn't go, too!"

But the black girl drew proudly back.

"I _am_ there," she returned, with unmistakable simplicity of absolute
conviction.

The white woman shrank back. Her heart was wrung; she wanted to say
more--to explain, to ask to help; there came welling to her lips a flood
of things that she would know. But Zora's face again was masked.

"I must go," she said, before Mary could speak. "Good-bye." And the dark
groaning depths of the cabin swallowed her.

With a satisfied smile, Harry Cresswell had seen the Northern girl
disappear toward the swamp; for it is significant when maidens run from
lovers. But maidens should also come back, and when, after the lapse of
many minutes, Mary did not reappear, he followed her footsteps to the
swamp.

He frowned as he noted the footprints pointing to Elspeth's--what did
Mary Taylor want there? A fear started within him, and something else.
He was suddenly aware that he wanted this woman, intensely; at the
moment he would have turned Heaven and earth to get her. He strode
forward and the wood rose darkly green above him. A long, low, distant
moan seemed to sound upon the breeze, and after it came Mary Taylor.

He met her with tender solicitude, and she was glad to feel his arm
beneath hers.

"I've been searching for you," he said after a silence. "You should not
wander here alone--it is dangerous."

"Why, dangerous?" she asked.

"Wandering Negroes, and even wild beasts, in the forest depths--and
malaria--see, you tremble now."

"But not from malaria," she slowly returned.

He caught an unfamiliar note in his voice, and a wild desire to justify
himself before this woman clamored in his heart. With it, too, came a
cooler calculating intuition that frankness alone would win her now. At
all hazards he must win, and he cast the die.

"Miss Taylor," he said, "I want to talk to you--I have wanted to for--a
year." He glanced at her: she was white and silent, but she did not
tremble. He went on:

"I have hesitated because I do not know that I have a right to speak or
explain to--to--a good woman."

He felt her arm tighten on his and he continued:

"You have been to Elspeth's cabin; it is an evil place, and has meant
evil for this community, and for me. Elspeth was my mother's favorite
servant and my own mammy. My mother died when I was ten and left me to
her tender mercies. She let me have my way and encouraged the bad in me.
It's a wonder I escaped total ruin. Her cabin became a rendezvous for
drinking and carousing. I told my father, but he, in lazy indifference,
declared the place no worse than all Negro cabins, and did nothing. I
ceased my visits. Still she tried every lure and set false stories going
among the Negroes, even when I sought to rescue Zora. I tell you this
because I know you have heard evil rumors. I have not been a good
man--Mary; but I love you, and you can make me good."

Perhaps no other appeal would have stirred Mary Taylor. She was in many
respects an inexperienced girl. But she thought she knew the world; she
knew that Harry Cresswell was not all he should be, and she knew too
that many other men were not. Moreover, she argued he had not had a fair
chance. All the school-ma'am in her leaped to his teaching. What he
needed was a superior person like herself. She loved him, and she
deliberately put her arms about his neck and lifted her face to be
kissed.

Back by the place of the Silver Fleece they wandered, across the Big
Road, up to the mansion. On the steps stood John Taylor and Helen
Cresswell hand in hand and they all smiled at each other. The Colonel
came out, smiling too, with the paper in his hands.

"Easterly's right," he beamed, "the stock of the Cotton Combine--" he
paused at the silence and looked up. The smile faded slowly and the red
blood mounted to his forehead. Anger struggled back of surprise, but
before it burst forth silently the Colonel turned, and muttering some
unintelligible word, went slowly into the house and slammed the door.

So for Harry Cresswell the day burst, flamed, and waned, and then
suddenly went out, leaving him dull and gray; for Mary and her brother
had gone North, Helen had gone to bed, and the Colonel was in town.
Outside the weather was gusty and lowering with a chill in the air. He
paced the room fitfully.

Well, he was happy. Or, was he happy?

He gnawed his mustache, for already his quick, changeable nature was
feeling the rebound from glory to misery. He was a little ashamed of his
exaltation; a bit doubtful and uncertain. He had stooped low to this
Yankee school-ma'am, lower than he had ever stooped to a woman. Usually,
while he played at loving, women grovelled; for was he not a Cresswell?
Would this woman recognize that fact and respect him accordingly?

Then there was Zora; what had she said and hinted to Mary? The wench was
always eluding and mocking him, the black devil! But, pshaw!--he poured
himself a glass of brandy--was he not rich and young? The world was his.

His valet knocked.

"Gentleman is asking if you forgits it's Saturday night, sir?" said Sam.

Cresswell walked thoughtfully to the window, swept back the curtain, and
looked toward the darkness and the swamp. It lowered threateningly;
behind it the night sky was tinged with blood.

"No," he said; "I'm not going." And he shut out the glow.

Yet he grew more and more restless. The devil danced in his veins and
burned in his forehead. His hands shook. He heard a rustle of departing
feet beneath his window, then a pause and a faint halloo.

"All right," he called, and in a moment went downstairs and out into
the night. As he closed the front door there seemed to come faintly up
from the swamp a low ululation, like the prolonged cry of some wild
bird, or the wail of one's mourning for his dead.

Within the cabin, Elspeth heard. Tremblingly, she swayed to her feet, a
haggard, awful sight. She motioned Zora away, and stretching her hands
palms upward to the sky, cried with dry and fear-struck gasp:

"I'se called! I'se called!"

On the bed the child smiled in its dreaming; the red flame of the
firelight set the gold to dancing in her hair. Zora shrank back into the
shadows and listened. Then it came. She heard the heavy footsteps
crashing through the underbrush--coming, coming, as from the end of the
world. She shrank still farther back, and a shadow swept the door.

He was a mighty man, black and white-haired, and his eyes were the eyes
of death. He bent to enter the door, and then uplifting himself and
stretching his great arms, his palms touched the blackened rafters.

Zora started forward. Thick memories of some forgotten past came piling
in upon her. Where had she known him? What was he to her?

Slowly Elspeth, with quivering hands, unwound the black and snake-like
object that always guarded her breast. Without a word, he took it, and
again his hands flew heavenward. With a low and fearful moan the old
woman lurched sideways, then crashed, like a fallen pine, upon the
hearthstone. She lay still--dead.

Three times the man passed his hands, wave-like, above the dead. Three
times he murmured, and his eyes burned into the shadows, where the girl
trembled. Then he turned and went as he had come, his heavy feet
crashing through the underbrush, on and on, fainter and fainter, as to
the end of the world.

Zora shook herself from the trance-like horror and passed her hands
across her eyes to drive out the nightmare. But, no! there lay the dead
upon the hearth with the firelight flashing over her, a bloated,
hideous, twisted thing, distorted in the rigor of death. A moment Zora
looked down upon her mother. She felt the cold body whence the
wandering, wrecked soul had passed. She sat down and stared death in the
face for the first time. A mighty questioning arose within, a
questioning and a yearning.

Was Elspeth now at peace? Was Death the Way--the wide, dark Way? She had
never thought of it before, and as she thought she crept forward and
looked into the fearful face pityingly.

"Mammy!" she whispered--with bated breath--"Mammy Elspeth!" Out of the
night came a whispered answer: "_Elspeth! Elspeth!_"

Zora sprang to her feet, alert, fearful. With a swing of her arm, she
pulled the great oaken door to and dropped the bar into its place. Over
the dead she spread a clean white sheet. Into the fire she thrust
pine-knots. They glared in vague red, and shadowy brilliance, waving and
quivering and throwing up thin swirling columns of black smoke. Then
standing beside the fireplace with the white, still corpse between her
and the door, she took up her awful vigil.

There came a low knocking at the door; then silence and footsteps
wandering furtively about. The night seemed all footsteps and whispers.
There came a louder knocking, and a voice:

"_Elspeth! Elspeth! Open the door; it's me._"

Then muttering and wandering noises, and silence again.

The child on the bed turned itself, murmuring uneasily in its dreams.
And then _they_ came. Zora froze, watching the door, wide-eyed, while
the fire flamed redder. A loud quick knock at the door--a pause--an oath
and a cry.

"_Elspeth! Open this door, damn you!_"

A moment of waiting and then the knocking came again, furious and long
continued. Outside there was much trampling and swearing. Zora did not
move; the child slept on. A tugging and dragging, a dull blow that set
the cabin quivering; then,--

"_Bang! Crack! Crash!_"--the door wavered, splintered, and dropped upon
the floor.

With a snarl, a crowd of some half-dozen white faces rushed forward,
wavered and stopped. The awakened child sat up and stared with wide blue
eyes. Slowly, with no word, the intruders turned and went silently away,
leaving but one late comer who pressed forward.

"What damned mummery is this?" he cried, and snatching at the sheet,
dragged it from the black distorted countenance of the corpse. He
shuddered but for a moment he could not stir. He felt the midnight eyes
of the girl--he saw the twisted, oozing mouth of the hag, blue-black and
hideous.

Suddenly back behind there in the darkness a shriek split the night like
a sudden flash of flame--a great ringing scream that cracked and swelled
and stopped. With one wild effort the man hurled himself out the door
and plunged through the darkness. Panting and cursing, he flashed his
huge revolver--"_bang! bang! bang!_" it cracked into the night. The
sweat poured from his forehead; the terror of the swamp was upon him.
With a struggling and tearing in his throat, he tripped and fell
fainting under the silent oaks.




_Twenty_

THE WEAVING OF THE SILVER FLEECE


The Silver Fleece, darkly cloaked and girded, lay in the cotton
warehouse of the Cresswells, near the store. Its silken fibres, cramped
and close, shone yellow-white in the sunlight; sadly soiled, yet
beautiful. Many came to see Zora's twin bales, as they lay, handling
them and questioning, while Colonel Cresswell grew proud of his
possession.


The world was going well with the Colonel. Freed from money cares,
praised for his generalship in the cotton corner, able to entertain
sumptuously, he was again a Southern gentleman of the older school, and
so in his envied element. Yet today he frowned as he stood poking
absently with his cane at the baled Fleece.

This marriage--or, rather, these marriages--were not to his liking. It
was a _mesalliance_ of a sort that pricked him tenderly; it savored
grossly of bargain and sale. His neighbors regarded it with
disconcerting equanimity. They seemed to think an alliance with
Northern millions an honor for Cresswell blood, and the Colonel thumped
the nearer bale vigorously. His cane slipped along the iron bands
suddenly, and the old man lurching forward, clutched in space to save
himself and touched a human hand.

Zora, sitting shadowed on the farther bale, drew back her hand quickly
at the contact, and started to move away.

"Who's that?" thundered the Colonel, more angry at his involuntary
fright than at the intrusion. "Here, boys!"

But Zora had come forward into the space where the sunlight of the wide
front doors poured in upon the cotton bales.

"It's me, Colonel," she said.

He glared at her. She was taller and thinner than formerly, darkly
transparent of skin, and her dark eyes shone in strange and dusky
brilliance. Still indignant and surprised, the Colonel lifted his voice
sharply.

"What the devil are you doing here?--sleeping when you ought to be at
work! Get out! And see here, next week cotton chopping begins--you'll go
to the fields or to the chain-gang. I'll have no more of your loafing
about my place."

Awaiting no reply, the Colonel, already half ashamed of his vehemence,
stormed out into the sunlight and climbed upon his bay mare.

But Zora still stood silent in the shadow of the Silver Fleece, hearing
and yet not hearing. She was searching for the Way, groping for the
threads of life, seeking almost wildly to understand the foundations of
understanding, piteously asking for answer to the puzzle of life. All
the while the walls rose straight about her and narrow. To continue in
school meant charity, yet she had nowhere to go and nothing to go with.
To refuse to work for the Cresswells meant trouble for the school and
perhaps arrest for herself. To work in the fields meant endless toil and
a vista that opened upon death.

Like a hunted thing the girl turned and twisted in thought and faced
everywhere the blank Impossible. Cold and dreamlike without, her shut
teeth held back seething fires within, and a spirit of revolt that
gathered wildness as it grew. Above all flew the dream, the phantasy,
the memory of the past, the vision of the future. Over and over she
whispered to herself: "This is not the End; this can not be the End."

Somehow, somewhere, would come salvation. Yet what it would be and what
she expected she did not know. She sought the Way, but what way and
whither she did not know, she dared not dream.

One thing alone lay in her wild fancy like a great and wonderful fact
dragging the dream to earth and anchoring it there. That was the Silver
Fleece. Like a brooding mother, Zora had watched it. She knew how the
gin had been cleaned for its pressing and how it had been baled apart
and carefully covered. She knew how proud Colonel Cresswell was of it
and how daily he had visitors to see it and finger the wide white wound
in its side.

"Yes, sir, grown on my place, by my niggers, sir!" he assured them; and
they marvelled.

To Zora's mind, this beautiful baled fibre was hers; it typified
happiness; it was an holy thing which profane hands had stolen. When it
came back to her (as come it must, she cried with clenched hands) it
would bring happiness; not the great Happiness--that was gone
forever--but illumination, atonement, and something of the power and the
glory. So, involuntarily almost, she haunted the cotton storehouse,
flitting like a dark and silent ghost in among the workmen, greeting
them with her low musical voice, warding them with the cold majesty of
her eyes; each day afraid of some last parting, each night
triumphant--it was still there!

The Colonel--Zora already forgotten--rode up to the Cresswell Oaks,
pondering darkly. It was bad enough to contemplate Helen's marriage in
distant prospect, but the sudden, almost peremptory desire for marrying
at Eastertide, a little less than two months away, was absurd. There
were "business reasons arising from the presidential campaign in the
fall," John Taylor had telegraphed; but there was already too much
business in the arrangement to suit the Colonel. With Harry it was
different. Indeed it was his own quiet suggestion that made John Taylor
hurry matters.

Harry trusted to the novelty of his father's new wealth to make the
latter complacent; he himself felt an impatient longing for the haven of
a home. He had been too long untethered. He distrusted himself. The
devil within was too fond of taking the bit in his teeth. He would
remember to his dying day one awful shriek in the night, as of a soul
tormenting and tormented. He wanted the protection of a good woman, and
sometimes against the clear whiteness of her letters so joyous and
generous, even if a bit prim and didactic, he saw a vision of himself
reflected as he was, and he feared.

It was distinctively disconcerting to Colonel Cresswell to find Harry
quite in favor of early nuptials, and to learn that the sole objection
even in Helen's mind was the improbability of getting a wedding-gown in
time. Helen had all a child's naive love for beautiful and dainty
things, and a wedding-gown from Paris had been her life dream. On this
point, therefore, there ensued spirited arguments and much
correspondence, and both her brother and her lover evinced
characteristic interest in the planning.

Said Harry: "Sis, I'll cable to Paris today. They can easily hurry the
thing along."

Helen was delighted; she handed over a telegram just received from John
Taylor. "Send me, express, two bales best cotton you can get."

The Colonel read the message. "I don't see the connection between this
and hurrying up a wedding-gown," he growled. None of them discerned the
handwriting of Destiny.

"Neither do I," said Harry, who detected yielding in his father's tone.
"But we'd better send him the two prize bales; it will be a fine
advertisement of our plantation, and evidently he has a surprise in
store for us."

The Colonel affected to hesitate, but next morning the Silver Fleece
went to town.

Zora watched it go, and her heart swelled and died within her. She
walked to town, to the station. She did not see Mrs. Vanderpool arriving
from New Orleans; but Mrs. Vanderpool saw her, and looked curiously at
the tall, tragic figure that leaned so dolorously beside the freight
car. The bales were loaded into the express car; the train pulled away,
its hoarse snorting waking vague echoes in the forest beyond. But to the
girl who stood at the End, looking outward to darkness, those echoes
roared like the crack of doom. A passing band of contract hands called
to her mockingly, and one black giant, laughing loudly, gripped her
hand.

"Come, honey," he shouted, "you'se a'dreaming! Come on, honey!"

She turned abruptly and gripped his hand, as one drowning grips anything
offered--gripped till he winced. She laughed a loud mirthless laugh,
that came pouring like a sob from her deep lungs.

"Come on!" she mocked, and joined them.

They were a motley crowd, ragged, swaggering, jolly. There were husky,
big-limbed youths, and bold-faced, loud-tongued girls. To-morrow they
would start up-country to some backwoods barony in the kingdom of
cotton, and work till Christmas time. Today was the last in town; there
was craftily advanced money in their pockets and riot in their hearts.
In the gathering twilight they marched noisily through the streets; in
their midst, wide-eyed and laughing almost hysterically, marched Zora.

Mrs. Vanderpool meantime rode thoughtfully out of town toward Cresswell
Oaks. She was returning from witnessing the Mardi Gras festivities at
New Orleans and at the urgent invitation of the Cresswells had stopped
off. She might even stay to the wedding if the new plans matured.

Mrs. Vanderpool was quite upset. Her French maid, on whom she had
depended absolutely for five years or more, had left her.

"I think I want to try a colored maid," she told the Cresswells,
laughingly, as they drove home. "They have sweet voices and they can't
doff their uniform. Helene without her cap and apron was often mistaken
for a lady, and while I was in New Orleans a French confectioner married
her under some such delusion. Now, haven't you a girl about here who
would do?"

"No," declared Harry decisively, but his sister suggested that she might
ask Miss Smith at the colored school.

Again Mrs. Vanderpool laughed, but after tea she wandered idly down the
road. The sun behind the swamp was crimsoning the world. Mrs. Vanderpool
strolled alone to the school, and saw Sarah Smith. There was no
cordiality in the latter's greeting, but when she heard the caller's
errand her attention was at once arrested and held. The interests of her
charges were always uppermost in her mind.

"Can't I have the girl Zora?" Mrs. Vanderpool at last inquired.

Miss Smith started, for she was thinking of Zora at that very instant.
The girl was later than usual, and she was momentarily expecting to see
her tall form moving languidly up the walk.

She gave Mrs. Vanderpool a searching look. Mrs. Vanderpool glanced
involuntarily at her gown and smiled as she did it.

"Could I trust you with a human soul?" asked Miss Smith abruptly.

Mrs. Vanderpool looked up quickly. The half mocking answer that rose
involuntarily to her lips was checked. Within, Mrs. Vanderpool was a
little puzzled at herself. Why had she asked for this girl? She had felt
a strange interest in her--a peculiar human interest since she first saw
her and as she saw her again this afternoon. But would she make a
satisfactory maid? Was it not a rather dangerous experiment? Why had she
asked for her? She certainly had not intended to when she entered the
house.

In the silence Miss Smith continued: "Here is a child in whom the
fountains of the great deep are suddenly broken up. With peace and care
she would find herself, for she is strong. But here there is no peace.
Slavery of soul and body awaits her and I am powerless to protect her.
She must go away. That going away may make or ruin her. She knows
nothing of working for wages and she has not the servant's humility; but
she has loyalty and pluck. For one she loves there is nothing she would
not do; but she cannot be driven. Or rather, if she is driven, it may
rouse in her the devil incarnate. She needs not exactly affection--she
would almost resent that--but intelligent interest and care. In return
for this she will gradually learn to serve and serve loyally. Frankly,
Mrs. Vanderpool, I would not have chosen you for this task of human
education. Indeed, you would have been my last thought--you seem to
me--I speak plainly--a worldly woman. Yet, perhaps--who can tell?--God
has especially set you to this task. At any rate, I have little choice.
I am at my wits' end. Elspeth, the mother of this child, is not long
dead; and here is the girl, beautiful, unprotected; and here am I,
almost helpless. She is in debt to the Cresswells, and they are pressing
the claim to her service. Take her if you can get her--it is, I fear,
her only chance. Mind you--if you can persuade her; and that may be
impossible."

"Where is she now?"

Miss Smith glanced out at the darkening landscape, and then at her
watch.

"I do not know; she's very late. She's given to wandering, but usually
she is here before this time."

"I saw her in town this afternoon," said Mrs. Vanderpool.

"Zora? In town?" Miss Smith rose. "I'll send her to you tomorrow," she
said quietly. Mrs. Vanderpool had hardly reached the Oaks before Miss
Smith was driving toward town.

A small cabin on the town's ragged fringe was crowded to suffocation.
Within arose noisy shouts, loud songs, and raucous laughter; the
scraping of a fiddle and whine of an accordion. Liquor began to appear
and happy faces grew red-eyed and sodden as the dances whirled. At the
edge of the orgy stood Zora, wild-eyed and bewildered, mad with the pain
that gripped her heart and hammered in her head, crying in tune with the
frenzied music--"the End--the End!"

Abruptly she recognized a face despite the wreck and ruin of its beauty.

"Bertie!" she cried as she seized the mother of little Emma by the arm.

The woman staggered and offered her glass.

"Drink," she cried, "drink and forget."

In a moment Zora sprang forward and seized the burning liquid in both
hands. A dozen hands clapped a devil's tattoo. A score of voices yelled
and laughed. The shriek of the music was drowned beneath the thunder of
stamping feet. Men reeled to singing women's arms, but above the roar
rose the song of the voice of Zora--she glided to the middle of the
room, standing tip-toed with skirts that curled and turned; she threw
back her head, raised the liquor to her lips, paused and looked into the
face of Miss Smith.

A silence fell like a lightning flash on the room as that white face
peered in at the door. Slowly Zora's hands fell and her eyes blinked as
though waking from some awful dream. She staggered toward the woman's
outstretched arms....

Late that night the girl lay close in Miss Smith's motherly embrace.

"I was going to hell!" she whispered, trembling.

"Why, Zora?" asked Miss Smith calmly.

"I couldn't find the Way--and I wanted to forget."

"People in hell don't forget," was the matter-of-fact comment. "And,
Zora, what way do you seek? The way where?"

Zora sat up in bed, and lifted a gray and stricken face.

"It's a lie," she cried, with hoarse earnedstness, "the way nowhere.
There is no Way! You know--I want _him_--I want nothing on earth but
him--and him I can't ever have."

The older woman drew her down tenderly.

"No, Zora," she said, "there's something you want more than him and
something you can have!"

"What?" asked the wondering girl.

"His respect," said Sarah Smith, "and I know the Way."




_Twenty-one_

THE MARRIAGE MORNING


Mrs. Vanderpool watched Zora as she came up the path beneath the oaks.
"She walks well," she observed. And laying aside her book, she waited
with a marked curiosity.

The girl's greeting was brief, almost curt, but unintentionally so, as
one could easily see, for back in her eyes lurked an impatient hunger;
she was not thinking of greetings. She murmured a quick word, and stood
straight and tall with her eyes squarely on the lady.

In the depths of Mrs. Vanderpool's heart something strange--not new, but
very old--stirred. Before her stood this tall black girl, quietly
returning her look. Mrs. Vanderpool had a most uncomfortable sense of
being judged, of being weighed,--and there arose within her an impulse
to self-justification.

She smiled and said sweetly, "Won't you sit?" But despite all this, her
mind seemed leaping backward a thousand years; back to a simpler,
primal day when she herself, white, frail, and fettered, stood before
the dusky magnificence of some bejewelled barbarian queen and sought to
justify herself. She shook off the phantasy,--and yet how well the girl
stood. It was not every one that could stand still and well.

"Please sit down," she repeated with her softest charm, not dreaming
that outside the school white persons did not ask this girl to sit in
their presence. But even this did not move Zora. She sat down. There was
in her, walking, standing, sitting, a simple directness which Mrs.
Vanderpool sensed and met.

"Zora, I need some one to help me--to do my hair and serve my coffee,
and dress and take care of me. The work will not be hard, and you can
travel and see the world and live well. Would you like it?"

"But I do not know how to do all these things," returned Zora, slowly.
She was thinking rapidly--Was this the Way? It sounded wonderful. The
World, the great mysterious World, that stretched beyond the swamp and
into which Bles and the Silver Fleece had gone--did it lead to the Way?
But if she went there what would she see and do, and would it be
possible to become such a woman as Miss Smith pictured?

"What is the world like?" asked Zora.

Mrs. Vanderpool smiled. "Oh, I meant great active cities and buildings,
myriads of people and wonderful sights."

"Yes--but back of it all, what is it really? What does it look like?"

"Heavens, child! Don't ask. Really, it isn't worth while peering back of
things. One is sure to be disappointed."

"Then what's the use of seeing the world?"

"Why, one must live; and why not be happy?" answered Mrs. Vanderpool,
amused, baffled, spurred for the time being from her chronic _ennui_.

"Are you happy?" retorted Zora, looking her over carefully, from silken
stockings to garden hat. Mrs. Vanderpool laid aside her little mockery
and met the situation bravely.

"No," she replied simply. Her eyes grew old and tired.

Involuntarily Zora's hand crept out protectingly and lay a moment over
the white jewelled fingers. Then quickly recovering herself, she started
hastily to withdraw it, but the woman's fingers closed around the darker
ones, and Mrs. Vanderpool's eyes became dim.

"I need you, Zora," she said; and then, seeing the half-formed question,
"Yes, and you need me; we need each other. In the world lies
opportunity, and I will help you."

Zora rose abruptly, and Mrs. Vanderpool feared, with a tightening of
heart, that she had lost this strangely alluring girl.

"I will come to-morrow," said Zora.

As Mrs. Vanderpool went in to lunch, reaction and lingering doubts came
trouping back. To replace the daintiest of trained experts with the most
baffling semi-barbarian, well!

"Have you hired a maid?" asked Helen.

"I've engaged Zora," laughed Mrs. Vanderpool, lightly; "and now I'm
wondering whether I have a jewel or--a white elephant."

"Probably neither," remarked Harry Cresswell, drily; but he avoided the
lady's inquiring eyes.

Next morning Zora came easily into Mrs. Vanderpool's life. There was
little she knew of her duties, but little, too, that she could not learn
with a deftness and divination almost startling. Her quietness, her
quickness, her young strength, were like a soothing balm to the tired
woman of fashion, and within a week she had sunk back contentedly into
Zora's strong arms.

"It's a jewel," she decided.

With this verdict, the house agreed. The servants waited on "Miss Zora"
gladly; the men scarcely saw her, and the ladies ran to her for help in
all sorts. Harry Cresswell looked upon this transformation with an
amused smile, but the Colonel saw in it simply evidence of dangerous
obstinacy in a black girl who hitherto had refused to work.

Zora had been in the house but a week when a large express package was
received from John Taylor. Its unwrapping brought a cry of pleasure
from the ladies. There lay a bolt of silken-like cambric of wondrous
fineness and lustre, marked: "For the wedding-dress." The explanation
accompanied the package, that Mary Taylor had a similar piece in the
North.

Helen and Harry said nothing of the cablegram to the Paris tailor, and
Helen took no steps toward having the cambric dress made, not even when
the wedding invitations appeared.

"A Cresswell married in cotton!" Helen was almost in tears lest the
Paris gown be delayed, and sure enough a cablegram came at last saying
that there was little likelihood of the gown being ready by Easter. It
would be shipped at the earliest convenience, but it could hardly catch
the necessary boat. Helen had a good cry, and then came a wild rush to
get John Taylor's cloth ready. Still, Helen was querulous. She decided
that silk embroidery must embellish the skirt. The dressmaker was in
despair.

"I haven't a single spare worker," she declared.

Helen was appealing to Mrs. Vanderpool.

"I can do it," said Zora, who was in the room.

"Do you know how?" asked the dressmaker.

"No, but I want to know."

Mrs. Vanderpool gave a satisfied nod. "Show her," she said. The
dressmaker was on the edge of rebellion. "Zora sews beautifully," added
Mrs. Vanderpool.

Thus the beautiful cloth came to Zora's room, and was spread in a glossy
cloud over her bed. She trembled at its beauty and felt a vague inner
yearning, as if some subtle magic of the woven web were trying to tell
her its story.

She worked over it faithfully and lovingly in every spare hour and in
long nights of dreaming. Wilfully she departed from the set pattern and
sewed into the cloth something of the beauty in her heart. In new and
intricate ways, with soft shadowings and coverings, she wove in that
white veil her own strange soul, and Mrs. Vanderpool watched her
curiously, but in silence.

Meantime all things were arranged for a double wedding at Cresswell
Oaks. As John and Mary Taylor had no suitable home, they were to come
down and the two brides to go forth from the Cresswell mansion.
Accordingly the Taylors arrived a week before the wedding and the home
took on a festive air. Even Colonel Cresswell expanded under the genial
influences, and while his head still protested his heart was glad. He
had to respect John Taylor's undoubted ability; and Mary Taylor was
certainly lovely, in spite of that assumption of cleverness of which the
Colonel could not approve.

Mary returned to the old scenes with mingled feelings. Especially was
she startled at seeing Zora a member of the household and apparently
high in favor. It brought back something of the old uneasiness and
suspicion.

All this she soon forgot under the cadence of Harry Cresswell's pleasant
voice and the caressing touch of his arm. He seemed handsomer than ever;
and he was, for sleep and temperance and the wooing of a woman had put a
tinge in his marble face, smoothed the puffs beneath his eyes, and given
him a more distinguished bearing and a firmer hand. And Mary Taylor was
very happy. So was her brother, only differently; he was making money;
he was planning to make more, and he had something to pet which seemed
to him extraordinarily precious and valuable.

Taylor eagerly inquired after the cloth, and followed the ladies to
Zora's room, adjoining Mrs. Vanderpool's, to see it. It lay uncut and
shimmering, covered with dim silken tracery of a delicacy and beauty
which brought an exclamation to all lips.

"That's what we can do with Alabama cotton," cried John Taylor in
triumph.

They turned to him incredulously.

"But--"

"No 'buts' about it; these are the two bales you sent me, woven with a
silk woof." No one particularly noticed that Zora had hastily left the
room. "I had it done in Easterly's New Jersey mills according to an old
plan of mine. I'm going to make cloth like that right in this county
some day," and he chuckled gayly.

But Zora was striding up and down the halls, the blood surging in her
ears. After they were gone she came back and closed the doors. She
dropped on her knees and buried her face in the filmy folds of the
Silver Fleece.

"I knew it! I knew it!" she whispered in mingled tears and joy. "It
called and I did not understand."

It was her talisman new-found; her love come back, her stolen dream come
true. Now she could face the world; God had turned it straight again.
She would go into the world and find--not Love, but the thing greater
than Love. Outside the door came voices--the dressmaker's tones, Helen's
soft drawl, and Mrs. Vanderpool's finished accents. Her face went
suddenly gray. The Silver Fleece was not hers! It belonged--She rose
hastily. The door opened and they came in. The cutting must begin at
once, they all agreed.

"Is it ready, Zora?" inquired Helen.

"No," Zora quietly answered, "not quite, but tomorrow morning, early."
As soon as she was alone again, she sat down and considered. By and by,
while the family was at lunch, she folded the Silver Fleece carefully
and locked it in her new trunk. She would hide it in the swamp. During
the afternoon she sent to town for oil-cloth, and bade the black
carpenter at Miss Smith's make a cedar box, tight and tarred. In the
morning she prepared Mrs. Vanderpool's breakfast with unusual care. She
was sorry for Mrs. Vanderpool, and sorry for Miss Smith. They would not,
they could not, understand. What would happen to her? She did not know;
she did not care. The Silver Fleece had returned to her. Soon it would
be buried in the swamp whence it came. She had no alternative; she must
keep it and wait.

She heard the dressmaker's voice, and then her step upon the stair. She
heard the sound of Harry Cresswell's buggy, and a scurrying at the front
door. On came the dressmaker's footsteps--then her door was
unceremoniously burst open.

Helen Cresswell stood there radiant; the dressmaker, too, was wreathed
in smiles. She carried a big red-sealed bundle.

"Zora!" cried Helen in ecstasy. "It's come!" Zora regarded her coldly,
and stood at bay. The dressmaker was ripping and snipping, and soon
there lay revealed before them--the Paris gown!

Helen was in raptures, but her conscience pricked her. She appealed to
them. "Ought I to tell? You see, Mary's gown will look miserably common
beside it."

The dressmaker was voluble. There was really nothing to tell; and
besides, Helen was a Cresswell and it was to be expected, and so forth.
Helen pursed her lips and petulantly tapped the floor with her foot.

"But the other gown?"

"Where is it?" asked the dressmaker, looking about. "It would make a
pretty morning-dress--"

But Helen had taken a sudden dislike to the thought of it.

"I don't want it," she declared. "And besides, I haven't room for it in
my trunks."

Of a sudden she leaned down and whispered to Zora: "Zora, hide it and
keep it if you want it. Come," to the dressmaker, "I'm dying to try this
on--now.... Remember, Zora--not a word." And all this to Zora seemed no
surprise; it was the Way, and it was opening before her because the
talisman lay in her trunk.

So at last it came to Easter morning. The world was golden with jasmine,
and crimson with azalea; down in the darker places gleamed the misty
glory of the dogwood; new cotton shook, glimmered, and blossomed in the
black fields, and over all the soft Southern sun poured its awakening
light of life. There was happiness and hope again in the cabins, and
hope and--if not happiness, ambition, in the mansions.

Zora, almost forgetting the wedding, stood before the mirror. Laying
aside her dress, she draped her shimmering cloth about her, dragging her
hair down in a heavy mass over ears and neck until she seemed herself a
bride. And as she stood there, awed with the mystical union of a dead
love and a living new born self, there came drifting in at the window,
faintly, the soft sound of far-off marriage music.

"'Tis thy marriage morning, shining in the sun!"

Two white and white-swathed brides were coming slowly down the great
staircase of Cresswell Oaks, and two white and black-clothed bridegrooms
awaited them. Either bridegroom looked gladly at the flow of his
sister's garments and almost darkly at his bride's. For Helen was decked
in Parisian splendor, while Mary was gowned in the Fleece.

"'Tis thy marriage morning, shining in the sun!"

Up floated the song of the little dark-faced children, and Zora
listened.




_Twenty-two_

MISS CAROLINE WYNN


Bles Alwyn was seated in the anteroom of Senator Smith's office in
Washington. The Senator had not come in yet, and there were others
waiting, too.

The young man sat in a corner, dreaming. Washington was his first great
city, and it seemed a never-ending delight--the streets, the buildings,
the crowds; the shops, and lights, and noise; the kaleidoscopic panorama
of a world's doing, the myriad forms and faces, the talk and laughter of
men. It was all wonderful magic to the country boy, and he stretched his
arms and filled his lungs and cried: "Here I shall live!"

Especially was he attracted by his own people. They seemed transformed,
revivified, changed. Some might be mistaken for field hands on a
holiday--but not many. Others he did not recognize--they seemed strange
and alien--sharper, quicker, and at once more overbearing and more
unscrupulous.

There were yet others--and at the sight of these Bles stood straighter
and breathed like a man. They were well dressed, and well appearing men
and women, who walked upright and looked one in the eye, and seemed like
persons of affairs and money. They had arrived--they were men--they
filled his mind's ideal--he felt like going up to them and grasping
their hands and saying, "At last, brother!" Ah, it was good to find
one's dreams, walking in the light, in flesh and blood. Continually such
thoughts were surging through his brain, and they were rioting through
it again as he sat waiting in Senator Smith's office.

The Senator was late this morning; when he came in he glanced at the
morning paper before looking over his mail and the list of his callers.
"Do fools like the American people deserve salvation?" he sneered,
holding off the headlines and glancing at them.

"'League Beats Trust.' ... 'Farmers of South Smash Effort to Bear Market
... Send Cotton to Twelve Cents ... Common People Triumph.'

"A man is induced to bite off his own nose and then to sing a pÃ¦an of
victory. It's nauseating--senseless. There is no earthly use striving
for such blockheads; they'd crucify any Saviour." Thus half consciously
Senator Smith salved his conscience, while he extracted a certificate of
deposit for fifty thousand dollars from his New York mail. He thrust it
aside from his secretary's view and looked at his list as he rang the
bell: there was Representative Todd, and somebody named Alwyn--nobody of
importance. Easterly was due in a half-hour. He would get rid of Todd
meantime.

"Poor Todd," he mused; "a lamb for the slaughter."

But he patiently listened to him plead for party support and influence
for his bill to prohibit gambling in futures.

"I was warned that it was useless to see you, Senator Smith, but I would
come. I believe in you. Frankly, there is a strong group of your old
friends and followers forming against you; they met only last night, but
I did not go. Won't you take a stand on some of these progressive
matters--this bill, or the Child Labor movement, or Low Tariff
legislation?"

Mr. Smith listened but shook his head.

"When the time comes," he announced deliberately, "I shall have
something to say on several of these matters. At present I can only say
that I cannot support this bill," and Mr. Todd was ushered out. He met
Mr. Easterly coming in and greeted him effusively. He knew him only as a
rich philanthropist, who had helped the Neighborhood Guild in
Washington--one of Todd's hobbies.

Easterly greeted Smith quietly.

"Got my letter?"

"Yes."

"Here are the three bills. You will go on the Finance Committee
tomorrow; Sumdrich is chairman by courtesy, but you'll have the real
power. Put the Child Labor Bill first, and we'll work the press. The
Tariff will take most of the session, of course. We'll put the cotton
inspection bill through in the last days of the session--see? I'm
manoeuvring to get the Southern Congressmen into line.... Oh, one thing.
Thompson says he's a little worried about the Negroes; says there's
something more than froth in the talk of a bolt in the Northern Negro
vote. We may have to give them a little extra money and a few more minor
offices than usual. Talk with Thompson; the Negroes are sweet on you and
he's going to be the new chairman of the campaign, you know. Ever met
him?"

"Yes."

"Well--so long."

"Just a moment," the statesman stayed the financier.

"Todd just let fall something of a combination against us in
Congress--know anything of it?"

"Not definitely; I heard some rumors. Better see if you can run it down.
Well, I must hurry--good day."

While Bles Alwyn in the outer office was waiting and musing, a lady
came in. Out of the corner of his eye he caught the curve of her gown,
and as she seated herself beside him, the suggestion of a faint perfume.
A vague resentment rose in him. Colored women would look as well as
that, he argued, with the clothes and wealth and training. He paused,
however, in his thought: he did not want them like the whites--so cold
and formal and precise, without heart or marrow. He started up, for the
secretary was speaking to him.

"Are you the--er--the man who had a letter to the Senator?"

"Yes, sir."

"Let me see it. Oh, yes--he will see you in a moment."

Bles was returning the letter to his pocket when he heard a voice almost
at his ear.

"I beg your pardon--"

He turned and started. It was the lady next to him, and she was colored!
Not extremely colored, but undoubtedly colored, with waving black hair,
light brown skin, and the fuller facial curving of the darker world. And
yet Bles was surprised, for everything else about her--her voice, her
bearing, the set of her gown, her gloves and shoes, the whole impression
was--Bles hesitated for a word--well, "white."

"Yes--yes, ma'am," he stammered, becoming suddenly conscious that the
lady had now a second time asked him if he was acquainted with Senator
Smith. "That is, ma'am,"--why was he saying "ma'am," like a child or a
servant?--"I know his sister and have a letter for him."

"Do you live in Washington?" she inquired.

"No--but I want to. I've been trying to get in as a clerk, and I haven't
succeeded yet. That's what I'm going to see Senator Smith about."

"Have you had the civil-service examinations?"

"Yes. I made ninety-three in the examination for a treasury clerkship."

"And no appointment? I see--they are not partial to us there."

Bles was glad to hear her say "us."

She continued after a pause:

"May I venture to ask a favor of you?"

"Certainly," he responded.

"My name is Wynn," lowering her voice slightly and leaning toward him.
"There are so many ahead of me and I am in a hurry to get to my school;
but I must see the Senator--couldn't I go in with you? I think I might
be of service in this matter of the examination, and then perhaps I'd
get a chance to say a word for myself."

"I'd be very glad to have you come," said Bles, cordially.

The secretary hesitated a little when the two started in, but Miss
Wynn's air was so quietly assured that he yielded.

Senator Smith looked at the tall, straight black man with his smooth
skin and frank eyes. And for a second time that morning a vision of his
own youth dimmed his eyes. But he spoke coldly:

"Mr. Alwyn, I believe."

"Yes, sir."

"And--"

"My friend, Miss Wynn."

The Senator glanced at Miss Wynn and she bowed demurely. Then he turned
to Alwyn.

"Well, Mr. Alwyn, Washington is a bad place to start in the world."

Bles looked surprised and incredulous. He could conceive of no finer
starting-place, but he said nothing.

"It is a grave," continued the Senator, "of ambitions and ideals. You
would far better go back to Alabama"--pausing and looking at the young
man keenly--"but you won't--you won't--not yet, at any rate." And Bles
shook his head slowly.

"No--well, what can I do for you?"

"I want work--I'll do anything."

"No, you'll do one thing--be a clerk, and then if you have the right
stuff in you you will throw up that job in a year and start again."

"I'd like at least to try it, sir."

"Well, I can't help you much there; that's in civil-service, and you
must take the examination."

"I have, sir."

"So? Where, and what mark?"

"In the Treasury Department; I got a mark of ninety-three."

"What!--and no appointment?" The Senator was incredulous.

"No, sir; not yet."

Here Miss Wynn interposed.

"You see, Senator," she said, "civil-service rules are not always
impervious to race prejudice."

The Senator frowned.

"Do you mean to intimate that Mr. Alwyn's appointment is held up because
he is colored?"

"I do."

"Well--well!" The Senator rang for a clerk.

"Get me the Treasury on the telephone."

In a moment the bell rang.

"I want Mr. Cole. Is that you, Mr. Cole? Good-morning. Have you a young
man named Alwyn on your eligible list? What? Yes?" A pause. "Indeed?
Well, why has he no appointment? Of course, I know, he's a Negro. Yes, I
desire it very much--thank you."

"You'll get an appointment to-morrow morning," and the Senator rose.
"How is my sister?" he asked absently.

"She was looking worried, but hopeful of the new endowment when I left."
The Senator held out his hand; Bles took it and then remembered.


"Oh, I beg pardon, but Miss Wynn wanted a word on another matter."

The Senator turned to Miss Wynn.

"I am a school-teacher, Senator Smith, and like all the rest of us I am
deeply interested in the appointment of the new school-board."

"But you know the district committee attends to those things," said the
Senator hastily. "And then, too, I believe there is talk of abolishing
the school-board and concentrating power in the hands of the
superintendent."

"Precisely," said Miss Wynn. "And I came to tell you, Senator Smith,
that the interests which are back of this attack upon the schools are no
friends of yours." Miss Wynn extracted from her reticule a typewritten
paper.

He took the paper and read it intently. Then he keenly scrutinized the
young woman, and she steadily returned his regard.

"How am I to know this is true?"

"Follow it up and see."

He mused.

"Where did you get these facts?" he asked suddenly.

She smiled.

"It is hardly necessary to say."

"And yet," he persisted, "if I were sure of its source I would know my
ground better and--my obligation to you would be greater."

She laughed and glanced toward Alwyn. He had moved out of earshot and
was waiting by the window.

"I am a teacher in the M Street High School," she said, "and we have
some intelligent boys there who work their way through."

"Yes," said the Senator.

"Some," continued Miss Wynn, tapping her boot on the carpet, "some--wait
on table."

The Senator slowly put the paper in his pocket.

"And now," he said, "Miss Wynn, what can I do for you?"

She looked at him.

"If Judge Haynes is reappointed to the school-board I shall probably
continue to teach in the M Street High School," she said slowly.

The Senator made a memorandum and said:

"I shall not forget Miss Wynn--nor her friends." And he bowed, glancing
at Alwyn.

The woman contemplated Bles in momentary perplexity, then bowing in
turn, left. Bles followed, debating just what he ought to say, how far
he might venture to accompany her, what--but she easily settled it all.

"I thank you--good-bye," she said briefly at the door, and was gone.
Bles did not know whether to feel relieved or provoked, or disappointed,
and by way of compromise felt something of all three.

The next morning he received notice of his appointment to a clerkship in
the Treasury Department, at a salary of nine hundred dollars. The sum
seemed fabulous and he was in the seventh heaven. For many days the
consciousness of wealth, the new duties, the street scenes, and the city
life kept him more than busy. He planned to study, and arranged with a
professor at Howard University to guide him. He bought an armful of
books and a desk, and plunged desperately to work.

Gradually as he became used to the office routine, and in the hours when
he was weary of study, he began to find time hanging a little heavily on
his hands; indeed--although he would not acknowledge it--he was getting
lonesome, homesick, amid the myriad men of a busy city. He argued to
himself that this was absurd, and yet he knew that he was longing for
human companionship. When he looked about him for fellowship he found
himself in a strange dilemma: those black folk in whom he recognized the
old sweet-tempered Negro traits, had also looser, uglier manners than he
was accustomed to, from which he shrank. The upper classes of Negroes,
on the other hand, he still observed from afar; they were strangers not
only in acquaintance but because of a curious coldness and aloofness
that made them cease to seem his own kind; they seemed almost at times
like black white people--strangers in way and thought.

He tried to shake off this feeling but it clung, and at last in sheer
desperation, he promised to go out of a night with a fellow clerk who
rather boasted of the "people" he knew. He was soon tired of the
strange company, and had turned to go home, when he met a newcomer in
the doorway.

"Why, hello, Sam! Sam Stillings!" he exclaimed delightedly, and was soon
grasping the hand of a slim, well-dressed man of perhaps thirty, with
yellow face, curling hair, and shifting eyes.

"Well, of all things, Bles--er--ah--Mr. Alwyn! Thought you were hoeing
cotton."

Bles laughed and continued shaking his head. He was foolishly glad to
see the former Cresswell butler, whom he had known but slightly. His
face brought back unuttered things that made his heart beat faster and a
yearning surge within him.

"I thought you went to Chicago," cried Bles.

"I did, but goin' into politics--having entered the political field, I
came here. And you graduated, I suppose, and all that?"

"No," Bless admitted a little sadly, as he told of his coming north, and
of Senator Smith's influence. "But--but how are--all?"

Abruptly Sam hooked his arm into Alwyn's and pulled him with him down
the street. Stillings was a type. Up from servility and menial service
he was struggling to climb to money and power. He was shrewd, willing to
stoop to anything in order to win. The very slights and humiliations of
prejudice he turned to his advantage. When he learned all the
particulars of Alwyn's visit to Senator Smith and his cordial reception
he judged it best to keep in touch with this young man, and he forthwith
invited Bles to accompany him the next night to the Fifteenth Street
Presbyterian Church.

"You'll find the best people there," he said; "the aristocracy. The
Treble Clef gives a concert, and everybody that's anybody will be
there."

They met again the following evening and proceeded to the church. It was
a simple but pleasant auditorium, nearly filled with well-dressed
people. During the programme Bles applauded vociferously every number
that pleased him, which is to say, every one--and stamped his feet,
until he realized that he was attracting considerable attention to
himself. Then the entertainment straightway lost all its charm; he grew
painfully embarrassed, and for the remainder of the evening was
awkwardly self-conscious. When all was over, the audience rose leisurely
and stood in little knots and eddies, laughing and talking; many moved
forward to say a word to the singers and players, Stillings stepped
aside to a group of men, and Bles was left miserably alone. A man came
to him, a white-faced man, with slightly curling close gray hair, and
high-bred ascetic countenance.

"You are a stranger?" he asked pleasantly, and Bles liked him.

"Yes, sir," he answered, and they fell to talking. He discovered that
this was the pastor of the church.

"Do you know no one in town?"

"One or two of my fellow clerks and Mr. Stillings. Oh, yes, I've met
Miss Wynn."

"Why, here is Miss Wynn now."

Bles turned. She was right behind him, the centre of a group. She
turned, slowly, and smiled.

"Oh!" she uttered twice, but with difference cadence. Then something
like amusement lurked a moment in her eye, and she quietly presented
Bles to her friends, while Stillings hovered unnoticed in the offing:

"Miss Jones--Mr. Alwyn of--" she paused a second--"Alabama. Miss
Taylor--Mr. Alwyn--and," with a backward curving of her neck, "Mr.
Teerswell," and so on. Mr. Teerswell was handsome and indolent, with
indecision in his face and a cynical voice. In a moment Bles felt the
subtle antagonism of the group. He was an intruder. Mr. Teerswell nodded
easily and turned away, continuing his conversation with the ladies.

But Miss Wynn was perverse and interrupted. "I saw you enjoyed the
concert, Mr. Alwyn," she said, and one of the young ladies rippled
audibly. Bles darkened painfully, realizing that these people must have
been just behind him. But he answered frankly:

"Yes, I did immensely--I hope I didn't disturb you; you see, I'm not
used to hearing such singing."

Mr. Teerswell, compelled to listen, laughed drily.

"Plantation melodies, I suppose, are more your specialty," he said with
a slight cadence.

"Yes," said Bles simply. A slight pause ensued.

Then came the surprise of the evening for Bles Alwyn. Even his
inexperienced eye could discern that Miss Wynn was very popular, and
that most of the men were rivals for her attentions.

"Mr. Alwyn," she said graciously, rising. "I'm going to trouble you to
see me to my door; it's only a block. Good-night, all!" she called, but
she bowed to Mr. Teerswell.

Miss Wynn placed her hand lightly on Bles's arm, and for a moment he
paused. A thrill ran through him as he felt again the weight of a little
hand and saw beside him the dark beautiful eyes of a girl. He felt again
the warm quiver of her body. Then he awoke to the lighted church and the
moving, well-dressed throng. The hand on his arm was not so small; but
it was well-gloved, and somehow the fancy struck him that it was a cold
hand and not always sympathetic in its touch.




_Twenty-three_

THE TRAINING OF ZORA


"I did not know the world was so large," remarked Zora as she and Mrs.
Vanderpool flew east and northward on the New York-New Orleans limited.
For a long time the girl had given herself up to the sheer delight of
motion. Gazing from the window, she compared the lands she passed with
the lands she knew: noting the formation of the cotton; the kind and
growth of the trees; the state of the roads. Then the comparisons became
infinite, endless; the world stretched on and on until it seemed mere
distance, and she suddenly realized how vast a thing it was and spoke.

Mrs. Vanderpool was amused. "It's much smaller than one would think,"
she responded.

When they came to Atlanta Zora stared and wrinkled her brows. It was her
first large city. The other towns were replicas of Toomsville; strange
in number, not in kind; but this was different, and she could not
understand it. It seemed senseless and unreasonable, and yet so
strangely so that she was at a loss to ask questions. She was very
solemn as they rode on and night came down with dreams.

She awoke in Washington to new fairylands and wonders; the endless going
and coming of men; great piles that challenged heaven, and homes crowded
on homes till one could not believe that they were full of living
things. They rolled by Baltimore and Philadelphia, and she talked of
every-day matters: of the sky which alone stood steadfast amid whirling
change; of bits of empty earth that shook themselves here and there
loose from their burden of men, and lay naked in the cold shining
sunlight.

All the while the greater questions were beating and curling and
building themselves back in her brain, and above all she was wondering
why no one had told her before of all this mighty world. Mrs.
Vanderpool, to whom it seemed too familiar for comment, had said no
word; or, if she had spoken, Zora's ears had not been tuned to
understand; and as they flew toward the towering ramparts of New York,
she sat up big with the terror of a new thought: suppose this world were
full yet of things she did not know nor dream of? How could she find
out? She must know.

When finally they were settled in New York and sat high up on the Fifth
Avenue front of the hotel, gradually the inarticulate questioning found
words, albeit strange ones.

"It reminds me of the swamp," she said.

Mrs. Vanderpool, just returned from a shopping tour, burst into
laughter.

"It is--but I marvel at your penetration."

"I mean, it is moving--always moving."

"The swamp seemed to me unearthly still."

"Yes--yes," cried Zora, eagerly, brushing back the rumpled hair; "and so
did the city, at first, to me."

"Still! New York?"

"Yes. You see, I saw the buildings and forgot the men; and the
buildings were so tall and silent against Heaven. And then I came to see
the people, and suddenly I knew the city was like the swamp, always
restless and changing."

"And more beautiful?" suggested Mrs. Vanderpool, slipping her arms into
her lounging-robe.

"Oh, no; not nearly so beautiful. And yet--more interesting." Then with
a puzzled look: "I wonder why?"

"Perhaps because it's people and not things."

"It's people in the swamp," asserted Zora, dreamily, smoothing out the
pillows of the couch, "'little people,' I call them. The difference is,
I think, that there I know how the story will come out; everything is
changing, but I know how and why and from what and to what. Now here,
_every_thing seems to be happening; but what is it that is happening?"

"You must know what has happened, to know what may happen," said Mrs.
Vanderpool.

"But how can I know?"

"I'll get you some books to-morrow."

"I'd like to know what it means," wistfully.

"It is meaningless." The woman's cynicism was lost upon Zora, of course,
but it possessed the salutary effect of stimulating the girl's thoughts,
encouraging her to discover for herself.

"I think not; so much must mean something," she protested.

Zora gathered up the clothes and things and shaded the windows, glancing
the while down on the street.

"Everybody is going, going," she murmured. "I wonder where. Don't they
ever get there?"

"Few arrive," said Mrs. Vanderpool. Zora softly bent and passed her cool
soft hand over her forehead.

"Then why do they go?"

"The zest of the search, perhaps."

"No," said Zora as she noiselessly left the room and closed the door;
"no, they are searching for something they have lost. Perhaps they, too,
are searching for the Way," and the tears blinded her eyes.

Mrs. Vanderpool lay in the quiet darkened room with a puzzled smile on
her lips. A month ago she had not dreamed that human interest in anybody
would take so strong a hold upon her as her liking for Zora had done.
She was a woman of unusual personal charm, but her own interest and
affections were seldom stirred. Had she been compelled to earn a living
she would have made a successful teacher or manipulator of men. As it
was, she viewed the human scene with detached and cynical interest. She
had no children, few near relations, a husband who went his way and
still was a gentleman.

Essentially Mrs. Vanderpool was unmoral. She held the code of her social
set with sportsmanlike honor; but even beyond this she stooped to no
intrigue, because none interested her. She had all the elements of power
save the motive for doing anything in particular. For the first time,
perhaps, Zora gave her life a peculiar human interest. She did not love
the girl, but she was intensely interested in her; some of the interest
was selfish, for Zora was going to be a perfect maid. The girl's
language came to be more and more like Mrs. Vanderpool's; her dress and
taste in adornment had been Mrs. Vanderpool's first care, and it led to
a curious training in art and sense of beauty until the lady now and
then found herself learner before the quick suggestiveness of Zora's
mind.

When Mrs. Harry Cresswell called a month or so later the talk naturally
included mention of Zora. Mary was happy and vivacious, and noted the
girl's rapid development.

"I wonder what I shall make out of her?" queried Mrs. Vanderpool. "Do
you know, I believe I could mould her into a lady if she were not
black."

Mary Cresswell laughed. "With that hair?"

"It has artistic possibilities. You should have seen my hair-dresser's
face when I told her to do it up. Her face and Zora's were a pantomime
for the gods. Yet it was done. It lay in some great twisted cloud and in
that black net gown of mine Zora was simply magnificent. Her form is
perfect, her height is regal, her skin is satin, and my jewels found a
resting place at last. Jewels, you know, dear, were never meant for
white folk. I was tempted to take her to the box at the opera and let
New York break its impudent neck."

Mary was shocked.

"But, Mrs. Vanderpool," she protested, "is it right? Is it fair? Why
should you spoil this black girl and put impossible ideas into her head?
You can make her a perfect maid, but she can never be much more in
America."

"She is a perfect maid now; that's the miracle of it--she's that deft
and quick and quiet and thoughtful! The hotel employees think her
perfect; my friends rave--really, I'm the most blessed of women. But do
you know I like the girl? I--well, I think of her future."

"It's wrong to treat her as you do. You make her an equal. Her room is
one of the best and filled with books and bric-a-brac. She sometimes
eats with you--is your companion, in fact."

"What of it? She loves to read, and I guide her while she keeps me up on
the latest stuff. She can talk much better than many of my friends and
then she piques my curiosity: she's a sort of intellectual sauce that
stirs my rapidly failing mental appetite. I think that as soon as I can
make up my mind to spare her, I'll take her to France and marry her off
in the colonies."

"Well, that's possible; but one doesn't easily give up good servants. By
the way, I learn from Miss Smith that the boy, Bles Alwyn, in whom Zora
was so interested, is a clerk in the Treasury Department at Washington."

"Indeed! I'm going to Washington this winter; I'll look him over and see
if he's worth Zora--which I greatly doubt."

Mrs. Cresswell pursed her lips and changed the subject.

"Have you seen the Easterlys?"

"The ladies left their cards--they are quite impossible. Mr. Easterly
calls this afternoon. I can't imagine why, but he asked for an
appointment. Will you go South with Mr. Cresswell? I'm glad to hear he's
entering politics."

"No, I shall do some early house hunting in Washington," said Mrs.
Cresswell, rising as Mr. Easterly was announced.

Mr. Easterly was not at home in Mrs. Vanderpool's presence. She spoke a
language different from his, and she had shown a disconcerting way, in
the few times when he had spoken with her, of letting the weight of the
conversation rest on him. He felt very distinctly that Mrs. Vanderpool
was not particularly desirous of his company, nor that of his family.
Nevertheless, he needed Mrs. Vanderpool's influence just now, and he was
willing to pay considerable for it. Once under obligation to him her
services would be very valuable. He was glad to find Mrs. Cresswell
there. It showed that the Cresswells were still intimate, and the
Cresswells were bound to him and his interests by strong ties. He bowed
as Mrs. Cresswell left, and then did not beat around the bush because,
in this case, he did not know how.

"Mrs. Vanderpool, I need your aid."

Mrs. Vanderpool smiled politely, and murmured something.

"We are, you know, in the midst of a rather warm presidential campaign,"
continued Mr. Easterly.

"Yes?" with polite interest.

"We are going to win easily, but our majority in Congress for certain
matters will depend on the attitude of Southerners and you usually spend
the winters in Washington. If, now, you could drop a word here and
there--"

"But why should I?" asked Mrs. Vanderpool.

"Mrs. Vanderpool, to be frank, I know some excellent investments that
your influence in this line would help. I take it you're not so rich but
that--"

Mrs. Vanderpool smiled faintly.

"Really, Mr. Easterly, I know little about such matters and care less. I
have food and clothes. Why worry with more?"

Mr. Easterly half expected this and he determined to deliver his last
shot on the run. He arose with a disappointed air.

"Of course, Mrs. Vanderpool, I see how it is: you have plenty and one
can't expect your services or influence for nothing. It had occurred to
me that your husband might like something political; but I presume not."

"Something political?"

"Yes. You see, it's barely possible, for instance, that there will be a
change in the French ambassadorship. The present ambassador is old
and--well, I don't know, but as I say, it's possible. Of course though,
that may not appeal to you, and I can only beg your good offices in
charity if--if you see your way to help us. Well, I must be going."

"What is--I thought the President appointed ambassadors."

"To be sure, but we appoint Presidents," laughed Mr. Easterly.
"Good-day. I shall hope to see you in Washington."

"Good-day," Mrs. Vanderpool returned absently.

After he had gone she walked slowly to Zora's room and opened the door.
For a long time she stood quietly looking in. Zora was curled in a chair
with a book. She was in dreamland; in a world of books builded
thoughtfully for her by Mrs. Vanderpool, and before that by Miss Smith.
Her work took but little of her time and left hours for reading and
thinking. In that thought-life, more and more her real living centred.

Hour after hour, day after day, she lay buried, deaf and dumb to all
else. Her heart cried, up on the World's four corners of the Way, and to
it came the Vision Splendid. She gossiped with old Herodotus across the
earth to the black and blameless Ethiopians; she saw the sculptured
glories of Phidias marbled amid the splendor of the swamp; she listened
to Demosthenes and walked the Appian Way with Cornelia--while all New
York streamed beneath her window.

She saw the drunken Goths reel upon Rome and heard the careless Negroes
yodle as they galloped to Toomsville. Paris, she knew,--wonderful,
haunting Paris: the Paris of Clovis, and St. Louis; of Louis the Great,
and Napoleon III; of Balzac, and her own Dumas. She tasted the mud and
comfort of thick old London, and the while wept with Jeremiah and sang
with Deborah, Semiramis, and Atala. Mary of Scotland and Joan of Arc
held her dark hands in theirs, and Kings lifted up their sceptres.

She walked on worlds, and worlds of worlds, and heard there in her
little room the tread of armies, the paeans of victory, the breaking of
hearts, and the music of the spheres.

Mrs. Vanderpool watched her a while.

"Zora," she presently broke into the girl's absorption, "how would you
like to be Ambassador to France?"




_Twenty-four_

THE EDUCATION OF ALWYN


Miss Caroline Wynn of Washington had little faith in the world and its
people. Nor was this wholly her fault. The world had dealt cruelly with
the young dreams and youthful ambitions of the girl; partly with its
usual heartlessness, partly with that cynical and deadening reserve fund
which it has today for its darker peoples. The girl had bitterly
resented her experiences at first: she was brilliant and well-trained;
she had a real talent for sculpture, and had studied considerably; she
was sprung from at least three generations of respectable mulattoes, who
had left a little competence which yielded her three or four hundred
dollars a year. Furthermore, while not precisely pretty, she was
good-looking and interesting, and she had acquired the marks and
insignia of good breeding. Perhaps she wore her manners just a trifle
consciously; perhaps she was a little morbid that she would fail of
recognition as a lady. Nor was this unnatural: her brown skin invited a
different assumption. Despite this almost unconscious mental
aggressiveness, she was unusually presentable and always well-groomed
and pleasant of speech. Yet she found nearly all careers closed to her.
At first it seemed accidental, the luck of life. Then she attributed it
to her sex; but at last she was sure that, beyond chance and womanhood,
it was the colorline that was hemming her in. Once convinced of this,
she let her imagination play and saw the line even where it did not
exist.

With her bit of property and brilliant parts she had had many suitors
but they had been refused one after another for reasons she could hardly
have explained. For years now Tom Teerswell had been her escort. Whether
or not Caroline Wynn would every marry him was a perennial subject of
speculation among their friends and it usually ended in the verdict that
she could not afford it--that it was financially impossible.

Nevertheless, the two were usually seen in public together, and although
she often showed her quiet mastery of the situation, seldom had she
snubbed him so openly as at the Treble Clef concert.

Teerswell was furious and began to plot vengeance; but Miss Wynn was
attracted by the personality of Bles Alwyn. Southern country Negroes
were rare in her set, but here was a man of intelligence and keenness
coupled with an amazing frankness and modesty, and perceptibly shadowed
by sorrow. The combination was, so far as she had observed, both rare
and temporary and she was disposed to watch it in this case purely as a
matter of intellectual curiosity. At the door of her home, therefore,
after a walk of unusual interest, she said:

"I'm going to have a few friends in next Tuesday night; won't you come,
Mr. Alwyn?" And Mr. Alwyn said that he would.

Next morning Miss Wynn rather repented her hasty invitation, but of
course nothing could be done now. Nothing? Well, there was one thing;
and she went to the telephone. A suggestion to Bles that he might
profitably extend his acquaintance sent him to a certain tailor shop
kept by a friend of hers; a word to the tailor guarded against the least
suspicion of intrigue entering Bles's head.

It turned out quite as Miss Wynn had designed; Mr. Grey, the tailor,
gave Bles some points on dressing, and made him, Southern fashion, a
frock-coat for dress wear that set off his fine figure. On the night of
the gathering at Miss Wynn's Bles dressed with care, hesitating long
over a necktie, but at last choosing one which he had recently purchased
and which pleased him particularly. He was prompt to the minute and was
consequently the first guest; but Miss Wynn's greeting was so quietly
cordial that his embarrassment soon fled. She looked him over at leisure
and sighed at his tie; otherwise he was thoroughly presentable according
to the strictest Washington standard.

They sat down and talked of generalities. Then an idea occurring to her,
she conducted the conversation by devious paths to ties and asked Alwyn
if he had heard of the fad of collecting ties. He had not, and she
showed him a sofa pillow.

"Your tie quite attracted me," she said; "it would make just the dash of
color I need in my new pillow."

"You may have it and welcome. I'll send--"

"Oh, no! A bird in the hand, you know. I'll trade with you now for
another I have."

"Done!"

The exchange was soon made, Miss Wynn tying the new one herself and
sticking a small carved pin in it. Bles slowly sat down again, and after
a pause said, "Thank you."

She looked up quickly, but he seemed quite serious and good-natured.

"You see," he explained, "in the country we don't know much about ties."

The well-balanced Miss Wynn for a moment lost her aplomb, but only for a
moment.

"We must all learn," she replied with penetration, and so their
friendship was established.

The company now began to gather, and soon the double parlor held an
assemblage of twenty-five or thirty persons. They formed a picturesque
group: conventional but graceful in dress; animated in movement; full of
good-natured laughter, but quite un-American in the beautiful modulation
of their speaking tones; chiefly noticeable, however, to a stranger, in
the vast variety of color in skin, which imparted to the throng a
piquant and unusual interest. Every color was here; from the dark brown
of Alwyn, who was customarily accounted black, to the pale pink-white of
Miss Jones, who could "pass for white" when she would, and found her
greatest difficulties when she was trying to "pass" for black. Midway
between these two extremes lay the sallow pastor of the church, the
creamy Miss Williams, the golden yellow of Mr. Teerswell, the golden
brown of Miss Johnson, and the velvet brown of Mr. Grey. The guest
themselves did not notice this; they were used to asking one's color as
one asks of height and weight; it was simply an extra dimension in their
world whereby to classify men.

Beyond this and their hair, there was little to distinguish them from a
modern group of men and women. The speech was a softened English, purely
and, on the whole, correctly spoken--so much so that it seemed at first
almost unfamiliar to Bles, and he experienced again the uncomfortable
feeling of being among strangers. Then, too, he missed the loud but
hearty good-nature of what he had always called "his people." To be
sure, a more experienced observer might have noted a lively, excitable
tropical temperament set and cast in a cold Northern mould, and yet
flashing fire now and then in a sudden anomalous out-bursting. But Bles
missed this; he seemed to have slipped and lost his bearings, and the
characteristics of his simple world were rolling curiously about. Here
stood a black man with a white man's voice, and yonder a white woman
with a Negro's musical cadences; and yet again, a brown girl with
exactly Miss Cresswell's air, and yonder, Miss Williams, with Zora's
wistful willfulness.

Bles was bewildered and silent, and his great undying sorrow sank on his
heart with sickening hopeless weight. His hands got in the way and he
found no natural nook in all those wide and tastefully furnished rooms.
Once he discovered himself standing by a marble statue of a nude woman,
and he edged away; then he stumbled over a rug and saved himself only to
step on Miss Jones's silken train. Miss Jones's smile of pardon was
wintry. When he did approach a group and listen, they seemed speaking of
things foreign to him--usually of people he did not know, their homes,
their doings, their daughters and their fathers. They seemed to know
people intimately who lived far away.

"You mean the Smiths of Boston?" asked Miss Jones.

"No, of Cleveland. They're not related."

"I heard that McGhee of St. Paul will be in the city next week with his
daughter."

"Yes, and the Bentleys of Chicago."

Bles passed on. He was disappointed. He was full of things to say, of
mighty matters to discuss; he felt like stopping these people and
crying: "Ho! What of the morning? How goes the great battle for black
men's rights? I have came with messages from the host, to you who guard
the mountain tops."

Apparently they were not discussing or caring about "the Problem." He
grew disgusted and was edging toward the door when he encountered his
hostess.

"Is all well with you, Mr. Alwyn?" she asked lightly.

"No, I'm not enjoying myself," said Bles, truthfully.

"Delicious! And why not?"

He regarded her earnestly.

"There are so many things to talk about," he said; "earnest things;
things of importance. I--I think when our people--" he hesitated.
Our?--was _our_ right? But he went on: "When our people meet we ought
to talk of our situation, and what to do and--"

Miss Wynn continued to smile.

"We're all talking of it all the time," she said.

He looked incredulous.

"Yes, we are," she insisted. "We veil it a little, and laugh as lightly
as we can; but there is only one thought in this room, and that's grave
and serious enough to suit even you, and quite your daily topic."

"But I don't understand."

"Ah, there's the rub. You haven't learned our language yet. We don't
just blurt into the Negro Problem; that's voted bad form. We leave that
to our white friends. We saunter to it sideways, touch it delicately
because"--her face became a little graver--"because, you see, it hurts."

Bles stood thoughtful and abashed.

"I--I think I understand," he gravely said at last.

"Come here," she said with a sudden turn, and they joined an absorbed
group in the midst of a conversation.

"--Thinking of sending Jessie to Bryn Mawr," Bles heard Miss Jones
saying.

"Could she pass?"

"Oh, they might think her Spanish."

"But it's a snobbish place and she would have to give up all her
friends."

"Yes, Freddie could scarcely visit--" the rest was lost.

"Which, being interpreted," whispered Miss Wynn, "means that Bryn Mawr
draws the color line while we at times surmount it."

They moved on to another group.

"--Splendid draughtsman," a man was saying, "and passed at the head of
the crowd; but, of course, he has no chance."

"Why, it's civil-service, isn't it?"

"It is. But what of that? There was Watson--"

Miss Wynn did not pause. She whispered: "This is the tale of Civil
Service Reform, and how this mighty government gets rid of black men
who know too much."

"But--" Bles tried to protest.

"Hush," Miss Wynn commanded and they joined the group about the piano.
Teerswell, who was speaking, affected not to notice them, and continued:

"--I tell you, it's got to come. We must act independently and not be
bought by a few offices."

"That's all well enough for you to talk, Teerswell; you have no wife and
babies dependant on you. Why should we who have sacrifice the substance
for the shadow?"

"You see, the Judge has got the substance," laughed Teerswell. "Still I
insist: divide and conquer."

"Nonsense! Unite, and keep."

Bles was puzzled.

"They're talking of the coming campaign," said Miss Wynn.

"What!" exclaimed Bles aloud. "You don't mean that any one can advise a
black man to vote the Democratic ticket?"

An elderly man turned to them.

"Thank you, sir," he said; "that is just my attitude; I fought for my
freedom. I know what slavery is; may I forget God when I vote for
traitors and slave-holders."

The discussion waxed warm and Miss Wynn turned away and sought Miss
Jones.

"Come, my dear," she said, "it's 'The Problem' again." They sauntered
away toward a ring of laughter.

The discussion thus begun at Miss Wynn's did not end there. It was on
the eve of the great party conventions, and the next night Sam Stillings
came around to get some crumbs from this assembly of the inner circle,
into which Alwyn had been so unaccountably snatched, and outside of
which, despite his endeavors, Stillings lingered and seemed destined to
linger. But Stillings was a patient, resolute man beneath his
deferential exterior, and he saw in Bles a stepping stone. So he began
to drop in at his lodgings and tonight invited him to the Bethel
Literary.

"What's that?" asked Bles.

"A debating club--oldest in the city; the best people all attend."

Bles hesitated. He had half made up his mind that this was the proper
time to call on Miss Wynn. He told Stillings so, and told him also of
the evening and the discussion.

"Why, that's the subject up tonight," Stillings declared, "and Miss Wynn
will be sure to be there. You can make your call later. Perhaps you
wouldn't mind taking me when you call." Alwyn reached for his hat.

When they arrived, the basement of the great church was filling with a
throng of men and women. Soon the officers and the speaker of the
evening appeared. The president was a brown woman who spoke easily and
well, and introduced the main speaker. He was a tall, thin,
hatchet-faced black man, clean shaven and well dressed, a lawyer by
profession. His theme was "The Democratic Party and the Negro." His
argument was cool, carefully reasoned, and plausible. He was evidently
feeling for the sympathy of his audience, and while they were not
enthusiastic, they warmed to him gradually and he certainly was strongly
impressing them.

Bles was thinking. He sat in the back of the hall, tense, alert,
nervous. As the speaker progressed a white man came in and sat down
beside him. He was spectacled, with bushy eyebrows and a sleepy look.
But he did not sleep. He was very observant.

"Who's speaking?" he asked Bles, and Bles told him. Then he inquired
about one or two other persons. Bles could not inform him, but Stillings
could and did. Stillings seemed willing to devote considerable time to
him.

Bles forgot the man. He was almost crouching for a spring, and no sooner
had the speaker, with a really fine apostrophe to independence and
reason in voting, sat down, than Bles was on his feet, walking forward.
His form was commanding, his voice deep and musical, and his
earnestness terribly evident. He hardly waited for recognition from the
slightly astonished president, but fairly burst into speech.

"I am from Alabama," he began earnestly, "and I know the Democratic
Party." Then he told of government and conditions in the Black Belt, of
the lying, oppression, and helplessness of the sodden black masses;
then, turning, he reminded them of the history of slavery. Finally, he
pointed to Lincoln's picture and to Sumner's and mentioned other white
friends.

"And, my brothers, they are not all dead yet. The gentleman spoke of
Senator Smith and blamed and ridiculed him. I know Senator Smith but
slightly, but I do know his sister well."

Dropping to simple narrative, he told of Miss Smith and of his coming to
school; and if his audience felt that great depth of emotion that welled
beneath his quiet, almost hesitating, address, it was not simply because
of what he did say, but because, too, of the unspoken story that lay too
deep for words. He spoke for nearly an hour, and when he stopped, for a
moment his hearers sighed and then sprang into a whirlwind of applause.
They shouted, clapped, and waved while he sat in blank amazement, and
was with difficulty forced to the rostrum to bow again and again. The
spectacled white man leaned over to Stillings.

"Who is he?" he asked. Stillings told him. The man noted the name and
went quietly out.

Miss Wynn sat lost in thought, and Teerswell beside her fumed. She was
not easily moved, but that speech had moved her. If he could thus stir
men and not be himself swayed, she mused, he would be--invincible. But
tonight he was moved as greatly as his hearers had been, and that was
dangerous. If his intense belief happened to be popular, all right; but
if not? She frowned. He was worth watching, she concluded; quite worth
watching, and perhaps worth guiding.

When Alwyn accompanied her home that night, Miss Wynn set herself to
know him better for she suspected that he might be a coming man. The
best preliminary to her purpose was, she knew, to speak frankly of
herself, and that she did. She told him of her youth and training, her
ambitions, her disappointments. Quite unconsciously her cynicism crept
to the fore, until in word and tone she had almost scoffed at many
things that Alwyn held true and dear. The touch was too light, the
meaning too elusive, for Alwyn to grasp always the point of attack; but
somehow he got the distant impression that Miss Wynn had little faith in
Truth and Goodness and Love. Vaguely shocked he grew so silent that she
noticed it and concluded she had said too much. But he pursued the
subject.

"Surely there must be many friends of our race willing to stand for the
right and sacrifice for it?"

She laughed unpleasantly, almost mockingly.

"Where?"

"Well--there's Miss Smith."

"She gets a salary, doesn't she?"

"A very small one."

"About as large as she could earn. North, I don't doubt."

"But the unselfish work she does--the utter sacrifice?"

"Oh, well, we'll omit Alabama, and admit the exception."

"Well, here, in Washington--there's your friend, the Judge, who has
befriended you so, as you admit."

She laughed again.

"You remember our visit to Senator Smith?"

"Yes."

"Well, it got the Judge his reappointment to the school board."

"He deserved it, didn't he?"

"I deserved it," she said luxuriously, hugging her knee and smiling;
"you see, his appointment meant mine."

"Well, what of it--didn't--"

"Listen," she cut in a little sharply. "Once a young brown girl, with
boundless faith in white folks, went to a Judge's office to ask for an
appointment which she deserved. There was no one there. The benign old
Judge with his saintly face and white hair suggested that she lay aside
her wraps and spend the afternoon."

Bles arose to his feet.

"What--what did you do?" he asked.

"Sit down--there's a good boy." I said: "'Judge, a friend is expecting
me at two,' it was then half-past one, 'would I not best telephone?'"

"'Step right into the booth,' said the Judge, quite indulgently." Miss
Wynn leaned back, and Bles felt his heart sinking; but he said nothing.
"And then," she continued, "I telephoned the Judge's wife that he was
anxious to see her on a matter of urgent business; namely, my
appointment." She gazed reflectively out of the window. "You should have
seen his face when I told him," she concluded. "I was appointed."

But Bles asked coldly:

"Why didn't you have him arrested?"

"For what? And suppose I had?"

Bles threw out his arms helplessly.

"Oh! it isn't as bad as that all over the world, is it?"

"It's worse," affirmed Miss Wynn, quietly positive.

"And you are still friendly with him?"

"What would you have? I use the world; I did not make it; I did not
choose it. He is the world. Through him I earn my bread and butter. I
have shown him his place. Shall I try in addition to reform? Shall I
make him an enemy? I have neither time nor inclination. Shall I resign
and beg, or go tilting at windmills? If he were the only one it would be
different; but they're all alike." Her face grew hard. "Have I shocked
you?" she said as they went toward the door.

"No," he answered slowly. "But I still--believe in the world."

"You are young yet, my friend," she lightly replied. "And besides, that
good Miss Smith has gone and grafted a New England conscience on a
tropical heart, and--dear me!--but it's a gorgeous misfit.
Good-bye--come again." She bowed him graciously out, and paused to take
the mail from the box. There was, among many others, a letter from
Senator Smith.




_Twenty-five_

THE CAMPAIGN


Mr. Easterly sat in Mrs. Vanderpool's apartments in the New Willard,
Washington, drinking tea. His hostess was saying rather carelessly:

"Do you know, Mr. Vanderpool has developed a quite unaccountable liking
for the idea of being Ambassador to France?"

"Dear me!" mildly exclaimed Mr. Easterly, helping himself liberally to
cakes. "I do hope the thing can be managed, but--"

"What are the difficulties?" Mrs. Vanderpool interrupted.

"Well, first and foremost, the difficulty of electing our man."

"I thought that a foregone conclusion."

"It was. But do you know that we're encountering opposition from the
most unexpected source?"

The lady was receptive, and the speaker concluded:

"The Negroes."

"The Negroes!"

"Yes. There are five hundred thousand or more black voters in pivotal
Northern States, you know, and they're in revolt. In a close election
the Negroes of New York, Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois choose the
President."

"What's the matter?"

"Well, business interests have driven our party to make friends with the
South. The South has disfranchised Negroes and lynched a few. The
darkies say we've deserted them."

Mrs. Vanderpool laughed.

"What extraordinary penetration," she cried.

"At any rate," said Mr. Easterly, drily, "Mr. Vanderpool's first step
toward Paris lies in getting the Northern Negroes to vote the Republican
ticket. After that the way is clear."

Mrs. Vanderpool mused.

"I don't suppose you know any one who is acquainted with any number of
these Northern darkies?" continued Mr. Easterly.

"Not on my calling-list," said Mrs. Vanderpool, and then she added more
thoughtfully:

"There's a young clerk in the Treasury Department named Alwyn who has
brains. He's just from the South, and I happened to read of him this
morning--see here."

Mr. Easterly read an account of the speech at the Bethel Literary.

"We'll look this young man up," he decided; "he may help. Of course,
Mrs. Vanderpool, we'll probably win; we can buy these Negroes off with a
little money and a few small offices; then if you will use your
influence for the part with the Southerners, I can confidently predict
from four to eight years' sojourn in Paris."

Mrs. Vanderpool smiled and called her maid as Mr. Easterly went.

"Zora!" She had to call twice, for Zora, with widened eyes, was reading
the Washington Post.

Meantime in the office of Senator Smith, toward which Mr. Easterly was
making his way, several members of the National Republican campaign
committee had been closeted the day before.

"Now, about the niggers," the chairman had asked; "how much more boodle
do they want?"

"That's what's bothering us," announced a member; "it isn't the boodle
crowd that's hollering, but a new set, and I don't understand them; I
don't know what they represent, nor just how influential they are."

"What can I do to help you?" asked Senator Smith.

"This. You are here at Washington with these Negro office-holders at
your back. Find out for us just what this revolt is, how far it goes,
and what good men we can get to swing the darkies into line--see?"

"Very good," the Senator acquiesced. He called in a spectacled man with
bushy eyebrows and a sleepy look.

"I want you to work the Negro political situation," directed the
Senator, "and bring me all the data you can get. Personally, I'm at sea.
I don't understand the Negro of today at all; he puzzles me; he doesn't
fit any of my categories, and I suspect that I don't fit his. See what
you can find out."

The man went out, and the Senator turned to his desk, then paused and
smiled. One day, not long since, he had met a colored person who
personified his perplexity concerning Negroes; she was a lady, yet she
was black--that is, brown; she was educated, even cultured, yet she
taught Negroes; she was quiet, astute, quick and diplomatic--everything,
in fact, that "Negroes" were not supposed to be; and yet she was a
"Negro." She had given him valuable information which he had sought in
vain elsewhere, and the event proved it correct. Suppose he asked
Caroline Wynn to help him in this case? It would certainly do no harm
and it might elect a Republican president. He wrote a short letter with
his own hand and sent it to post.

Miss Wynn read the letter after Alwyn's departure with a distinct thrill
which was something of a luxury for her. Evidently she was coming to
her kingdom. The Republican boss was turning to her for confidential
information.

"What do the colored people want, and who can best influence them in
this campaign?"

She curled up on the ottoman and considered. The first part of the query
did not bother her.

"Whatever they want they won't get," she said decisively.

But as to the man or men who could influence them to believe that they
were getting, or about to get, what they wanted--there was a question.
One by one she considered the men she knew, and, by a process of
elimination, finally arrived at Bles Alwyn.

Why not take this young man in hand and make a Negro leader of him--a
protagonist of ten millions? It would not be unpleasant. But could she
do it? Would he be amenable to her training and become worldly wise? She
flattered herself that he would, and yet--there was a certain steadfast
look in the depths of his eyes that might prove to be sheer
stubbornness. At any rate, who was better? There was a fellow,
Stillings, whom Alwyn had introduced and whom she had heard of. Now he
was a politician--but nothing else. She dismissed him. Of course,
there was the older set of office-holders and rounders. But she was
determined to pick a new man. He was worth trying, at any rate; she knew
none other with the same build, the brains, the gifts, the adorable
youth. Very good. She wrote two letters, and then curled up to her novel
and candy.

Next day Senator Smith held Miss Wynn's letter unopened in his hand when
Mr. Easterly entered. They talked of the campaign and various matters,
until at last Easterly said:

"Say, there's a Negro clerk in the Treasury named Alwyn."

"I know him--I had him appointed."

"Good. He may help us. Have you seen this?"

The Senator read the clipping.

"I hadn't noticed it--but here's my agent."

The spectacled man entered with a mass of documents. He had papers,
posters, programmes, and letters.

"The situation is this," he said. "A small group of educated Negroes are
trying to induce the rest to punish the Republican Party for not
protecting them. These men are not politicians, nor popular leaders, but
they have influence and are using it. The old-style Negro politicians
are no match for them, and the crowd of office-holders are rather
bewildered. Strong measures are needed. Educated men of earnestness and
ability might stem the tide. And I believe I know one such man. He spoke
at a big meeting last night at the Metropolitan church. His name is
Alwyn."

Senator Smith listened as he opened the letter from Caroline Wynn. Then
he started.

"Well!" he ejaculated, looking quickly up at Easterly. "This is
positively uncanny. From three separate sources the name of Alwyn pops
up. Looks like a mascot. Call up the Treasury. Let's have him up when
the sub-committee meets to-morrow."

Bles Alwyn hurried up to Senator Smith's office, hoping to hear
something about the school; perhaps even about--but he stopped with a
sigh, and sat down in the ante-room. He was kept waiting a few moments
while Senator Smith, the chairman, and one other member of the
sub-committee had a word.

"Now, I don't know the young man, mind you," said the Senator; "but he's
strongly recommended."

"What shall we offer him?" asked the chairman.

"Try him at twenty-five dollars a speech. If he balks, raise to fifty
dollars, but no more."

They summoned the young man. The chairman produced cigars.

"I don't smoke," said Bles apologetically.

"Well, we haven't anything to drink," said the chairman. But Senator
Smith broke in, taking up at once the paramount interest.

"Mr. Alwyn, as you know, the Democrats are making an effort to get the
Negro vote in this campaign. Now, I know the disadvantages and wrongs
which black men in this land are suffering. I believe the Republicans
ought to do more to defend them, and I'm satisfied they will; but I
doubt if the way to get Negro rights is to vote for those who took them
away."

"I agree with you perfectly," said Bles.

"I understand you do, and that you made an unusually fine speech on the
subject the other night."

"Thank you, sir." This was a good deal more than Bles had expected, and
he was embarrassed.

"Well, now, we think you're just the man to take the stump during
September and October and convince the colored people of their real
interests."

"I doubt if I could, sir; I'm not a speaker. In fact, that was my first
public speech."

"So much the better. Are you willing to try?"

"Why, yes, sir; but I could hardly afford to give up my position."

"We'll arrange for a leave of absence."

"Then I'll try, sir."

"What would you expect as pay?"

"I suppose my salary would stop?"

"I mean in addition to that."

"Oh, nothing, sir; I'd be glad to do the work."

The chairman nearly choked; sitting back, he eyed the young man. Either
they were dealing with a fool, or else a very astute politician. If the
former, how far could they trust him; if the latter, what was his game?

"Of course, there'll be considerable travelling," the chairman ventured,
looking reflectively out of the window.

"Yes, sir, I suppose so."

"We might pay the railroad fare."

"Thank you, sir. When shall I begin?"

The chairman consulted his calendar.

"Suppose you hold yourself in readiness for one week from today."

"All right," and Bles rose. "Good-day, gentlemen."

But the chairman was still puzzled.

"Now, what's his game?" he asked helplessly.

"He may be honest," offered Senator Smith, contemplating the door almost
wistfully.

The campaign progressed. The National Republican Committee said little
about the Negro revolt and affected to ignore it. The papers were
silent. Underneath this calm, however, the activity was redoubled. The
prominent Negroes were carefully catalogued, written to, and put under
personal influence. The Negro papers were quietly subsidized, and they
began to ridicule and reproach the new leaders.

As the Fall progressed, mass-meetings were held in Washington and the
small towns. Larger and larger ones were projected, and more and more
Alwyn was pushed to the front. He was developing into a most effective
speaker. He had the voice, the presence, the ideas, and above all he was
intensely in earnest. There were other colored orators with voice,
presence, and eloquence; but their people knew their record and
discounted them. Alwyn was new, clear, and sincere, and the black folk
hung on his words. Large and larger crowds greeted him until he was the
central figure in a half dozen great negro mass-meetings in the chief
cities of the country, culminating in New York the night before
election. Perhaps the secret newspaper work, the personal advice of
employers and friends, and the liberal distribution of cash, would have
delivered a large part of the Negro vote to the Republican candidate.
Perhaps--but there was a doubt. With the work of Alwyn, however, all
doubt disappeared, and there was little reason for denying that the new
President walked into the White House through the instrumentality of an
unknown Georgia Negro, little past his majority. This is what Senator
Smith said to Mr. Easterly; what Miss Wynn said to herself; and it was
what Mrs. Vanderpool remarked to Zora as Zora was combing her hair on
the Wednesday after election.

Zora murmured an indistinct response. As already something of the beauty
of the world had found question and answer in her soul, and as she began
to realize how the world had waxed old in thought and stature, so now in
their last days a sense of the power of men, as set over against the
immensity and force of their surroundings, became real to her. She had
begun to read of the lives and doing of those called great, and in her
mind a plan was forming. She saw herself standing dim within the
shadows, directing the growing power of a man: a man who would be great
as the world counted greatness, rich, high in position,
powerful--wonderful because his face was black. He would never see her;
never know how she worked and planned, save perhaps at last, in that
supreme moment as she passed, her soul would cry to his, "Redeemed!" And
he would understand.

All this she was thinking and weaving; not clearly and definitely, but
in great blurred clouds of thought of things as she said slowly:

"He should have a great position for this."

"Why, certainly," Mrs. Vanderpool agreed, and then curiously: "What?"

Zora considered. "Negroes," she said, "have been Registers of the
Treasury, and Recorders of Deeds here in Washington, and Douglas was
Marshal; but I want Bles--" she paused and started again. "Those are not
great enough for Mr. Alwyn; he should have an office so important that
Negroes would not think of leaving their party again."

Mrs. Vanderpool took pains to repeat Zora's words to Mr. Easterly. He
considered the matter.

"In one sense, it's good advice," he admitted; "but there's the South to
reckon with. I'll think it over and speak to the President. Oh, yes; I'm
going to mention France at the same time."

Mrs. Vanderpool smiled and leaned back in her carriage. She noted with
considerable interest the young colored woman who was watching her from
the sidewalk: a brown, well-appearing young woman of notable
self-possession. Caroline Wynn scrutinized Mrs. Vanderpool because she
had been speaking with Mr. Easterly, and Mr. Easterly was a figure of
political importance. That very morning Miss Wynn had telegraphed Bles
Alwyn. Alwyn arrived at Washington just as the morning papers heralded
the sweeping Republican victory. All about he met new deference and new
friends; strangers greeted him familiarly on the street; Sam Stillings
became his shadow; and when he reported for work his chief and fellow
clerks took unusual interest in him.

"Have you seen Senator Smith yet?" Miss Wynn asked after a few words of
congratulation.

"No. What for?"

"What for?" she answered. "Go to him today; don't fail. I shall be at
home at eight tonight."

It seemed to Bles an exceedingly silly thing to do--calling on a busy
man with no errand; but he went. He decided that he would just thank the
Senator for his interest, and get out; or, if the Senator was busy, he
would merely send in his card. Evidently the Senator was busy, for his
waiting-room was full. Bles handed the card to the secretary with a word
of apology, but the secretary detained him.

"Ah, Mr. Alwyn," he said affably; "glad to see you. The Senator will
want to see you, I know. Wait just a minute." And soon Bles was shaking
Senator Smith's hand.

"Well, Mr. Alwyn," said the Senator heartily, "you delivered the goods."

"Thank you, sir. I tried to."

Senator Smith thoughtfully looked him over and drew out the letters.

"Your friends, Mr. Alwyn," he said, adjusting his glasses, "have a
rather high opinion of you. Here now is Stillings, who helped on the
campaign. He suggests an eighteen-hundred-dollar clerkship for you." The
Senator glanced up keenly and omitted to state what Stillings suggested
for himself. Alwyn was visibly grateful as well as surprised.

"I--I hoped," he began hesitatingly, "that perhaps I might get a
promotion, but I had not thought of a first-class clerkship."

"H'm." Senator Smith leaned back and twiddled his thumbs, staring at
Alwyn until the hot blood darkened his cheeks. Then Bles sat up and
stared politely but steadily back. The Senator's eyes dropped and he put
out his hand for the second note.

"Now, your friend, Miss Wynn"--Alwyn started--"is even more ambitious."
He handed her letter to the young man, and pointed out the words.

"Of course, Senator," Bles read, "we expect Mr. Alwyn to be the next
Register of the Treasury."

Bles looked up in amazement, but the Senator reached for a third letter.
The room was very still. At last he found it. "This," he announced
quietly, "is from a man of great power and influence, who has the ear of
the new President." He smoothed out the letter, paused briefly, then
read aloud:

"'It has been suggested to me by'"--the Senator did not read the name;
if he had "Mrs. Vanderpool" would have meant little to Alwyn--"'It has
been suggested to me by blank that the future allegiance of the Negro
vote to the Republican Party might be insured by giving to some
prominent Negro a high political position--for instance, Treasurer of
the United States'--salary, six thousand dollars," interpolated Senator
Smith--"'and that Alwyn would be a popular and safe appointment for that
position.'"

The Senator did not read the concluding sentence, which ran: "Think this
over; we can't touch political conditions in the South; perhaps this sop
will do."

For a long time Alwyn sat motionless, while the Senator said nothing.
Then the young man rose unsteadily.

"I don't think I quite grasp all this," he said as he shook hands.
"I'll think it over," and he went out.

When Caroline Wynn heard of that extraordinary conversation her
amazement knew no bounds. Yet Alwyn ventured to voice doubts:

"I'm not fitted for either of those high offices; there are many others
who deserve more, and I don't somehow like the idea of seeming to have
worked hard in the campaign simply for money or fortune. You see, I
talked against that very thing."

Miss Wynn's eyes widened.

"Well, what else--" she began and then changed. "Mr. Alwyn, the line
between virtue and foolishness is dim and wavering, and I should hate to
see you lost in that marshy borderland. By a streak of extraordinary
luck you have gained the political leadership of Negroes in America.
Here's your chance to lead your people, and here you stand blinking and
hesitating. Be a man!"

Alwyn straightened up and felt his doubts going. The evening passed very
pleasantly.

"I'm going to have a little dinner for you," said Miss Wynn finally, and
Alwyn grew hot with pleasure. He turned to her suddenly and said:

"Why, I'm rather--black." She expressed no surprise but said
reflectively:

"You _are_ dark."

"And I've been given to understand that Miss Wynn and her set
rather--well, preferred the lighter shades of colored folk."

Miss Wynn laughed lightly.

"My parents did," she said simply. "No dark man ever entered their
house; they were simply copying the white world. Now I, as a matter of
aesthetic beauty, prefer your brown-velvet color to a jaundiced yellow,
or even an uncertain cream; but the world doesn't."

"The world?"

"Yes, the world; and especially America. One may be Chinese, Spaniard,
even Indian--anything white or dirty white in this land, and demand
decent treatment; but to be Negro or darkening toward it unmistakably
means perpetual handicap and crucifixion."

"Why not, then, admit that you draw the color-line?"

"Because I don't; but the world does. I am not prejudiced as my parents
were, but I am foresighted. Indeed, it is a deep ethical query, is it
not, how far one has the right to bear black children to the world in
the Land of the Free and the home of the brave. Is it fair--to the
children?"

"Yes, it is!" he cried vehemently. "The more to take up the fight, the
surer the victory."

She laughed at his earnestness.

"You are refreshing," she said. "Well, we'll dine next Tuesday, and
we'll have the cream of our world to meet you."

He knew that this was a great triumph. It flattered his vanity. After
all, he was entering this higher dark world whose existence had piqued
and puzzled him so long. He glanced at Miss Wynn beside him there in the
dimly lighted parlor: she looked so aloof and unapproachable, so
handsome and so elegant. He thought how she would complete a house--such
a home as his prospective four or six thousand dollars a year could
easily purchase. She saw him surveying her, and she smiled at him.

"I find but one fault with you," she said.

He stammered for a pretty speech, but did not find it before she
continued:

"Yes--you are so delightfully primitive; you will not use the world as
it is but insist on acting as if it were something else."

"I am not sure I understand."

"Well, there is the wife of my Judge: she is a fact in my world; in
yours she is a problem to be stated, straightened, and solved. If she
had come to you, as she did to me yesterday, with her theory that all
that Southern Negroes needed was to learn how to make good servants and
lay brick--"

"I should have shown her--" Bles tried to interject.

"Nothing of the sort. You would have tried to show her and would have
failed miserably. She hasn't learned anything in twenty years."

"But surely you didn't join her in advocating that ten million people be
menials?"

"Oh, no; I simply listened."

"Well, there was no harm in that; I believe in silence at times."

"Ah! but I did not listen like a log, but positively and eloquently;
with a nod, a half-formed word, a comment begun, which she finished."

Bles frowned.

"As a result," continued Miss Wynn, "I have a check for five hundred
dollars to finish our cooking-school and buy a cast of Minerva for the
assembly-room. More than that, I have now a wealthy friend. She thinks
me an unusually clever person who, by a process of thought not unlike
her own, has arrived at very similar conclusions."

"But--but," objected Bles, "if the time spent cajoling fools were used
in convincing the honest and upright, think how much we would gain."

"Very little. The honest and upright are a sad minority. Most of these
white folk--believe me, boy," she said caressingly,--"are fools and
knaves: they don't want truth or progress; they want to keep niggers
down."

"I don't believe it; there are scores, thousands, perhaps millions such,
I admit; but the average American loves justice and right, and he is the
one to whom I appeal with frankness and truth. Great heavens! don't you
love to be frank and open?"

She narrowed her eyelids.

"Yes, sometimes I do; once I was; but it's a luxury few of us Negroes
can afford. Then, too, I insist that it's jolly to fool them."

"Don't you hate the deception?"

She chuckled and put her head to one side.

"At first I did; but, do you know, now I believe I prefer it."

He looked so horrified that she burst out laughing. He laughed too. She
was a puzzle to him. He kept thinking what a mistress of a mansion she
would make.

"Why do you say these things?" he asked suddenly.

"Because I want you to do well here in Washington."

"General philanthropy?"

"No, special." Her eyes were bright with meaning.

"Then you care--for me?"

"Yes."

He bent forward and cast the die.

"Enough to marry me?"

She answered very calmly and certainly:

"Yes."

He leaned toward her. And then between him and her lips a dark and
shadowy face; two great storm-swept eyes looked into his out of a world
of infinite pain, and he dropped his head in hesitation and shame, and
kissed her hand. Miss Wynn thought him delightfully bashful.




_Twenty-six_

CONGRESSMAN CRESSWELL


The election of Harry Cresswell to Congress was a very simple matter.
The Colonel and his son drove to town and consulted the Judge; together
they summoned the sheriff and the local member of the State legislature.

"I think it's about time that we Cresswells asked for a little of the
political pie," the Colonel smilingly opened.

"Well, what do you want?" asked the Judge.

"Harry wants to go to Congress."

The Judge hesitated. "We'd half promised that to Caldwell," he objected.


"It will be a little costly this year, too," suggested the sheriff,
tentatively.

"About how much?" asked the Colonel.

"At least five thousand," said the Legislator.

The Colonel said nothing. He simply wrote a check and the matter was
settled. In the Fall Harry Cresswell was declared elected. There were
four hundred and seventy-two votes cast but the sheriff added a cipher.
He said it would look better.

Early December found the Cresswells domiciled in a small house in Du
Pont Circle, Washington. They had an automobile and four servants, and
the house was furnished luxuriously. Mary Taylor Cresswell, standing in
her morning room and looking out on the flowers of the square, told
herself that few people in the world had cause to be as happy as she.
She was tastefully gowned, in a way to set off her blonde beauty and her
delicate rounded figure. She was surrounded with wealth, and above all,
she was in that atmosphere of aristocracy for which she had always
yearned; and already she was acquiring that poise of the head, and a
manner of directing the servants, which showed her born to the purple.

She had cause to be extremely happy, she told herself this morning, and
yet she was puzzled to understand why she was not. Why was she restless
and vaguely ill at ease so often these days?

One matter, indeed, did worry her; but that would right itself in time,
she was sure. She had always pictured herself as directing her husband's
work. She did not plan to step in and demand a share; she knew from
experience with her brother that a woman must prove her usefulness to a
man before he will admit it, and even then he may be silent. She
intended gradually and tactfully to relieve her husband of care
connected with his public life so that, before he realized it, she would
be his guiding spirit and his inspiration. She had dreamed the details
of doing this so long that it seemed already done, and she could imagine
no obstacle to its realization. And yet she found herself today no
nearer her goal than when first she married. Not because Mr. Cresswell
did not share his work, but because, apparently, he had no work, no
duties, no cares. At first, in the dim glories of the honeymoon, this
seemed but part of his delicate courtesy toward her, and it pleased her
despite her thrifty New England nature; but now that they were settled
in Washington, the election over and Congress in session, it really
seemed time for Work and Life to begin in dead earnest, and New England
Mary was dreaming mighty dreams and golden futures.

But Harry apparently was as content as ever with doing nothing. He arose
at ten, dined at seven, and went to bed between midnight and sunrise.
There was some committee meetings and much mail, but Mary was admitted
to knowledge of none of these. The obvious step, of course, would be to
set him at work; but from this undertaking Mary unconsciously recoiled.
She had already recognized that while her tastes and her husband's were
mostly alike, they were also strikingly different in many respects. They
agreed in the daintiness of things, the elegance of detail; but they did
not agree always as to the things themselves. Given the picture, they
would choose the same frame--but they would not choose the same picture.
They liked the same voice, but not the same song; the same company, but
not the same conversation. Of course, Mary reflected, frowning at the
flowers--of course, this must always be so when two human beings are
thrown into new and intimate association. In time they would grow to
sweet communion; only, she hoped the communion would be on tastes nearer
hers than those he sometimes manifested.

She turned impatiently from the window with a feeling of loneliness. But
why lonely? She idly fingered a new book on the table and then put it
down sharply. There had been several attempts at reading aloud between
them some evenings ago, and this book reminded her of them. She had
bought Jane Addams' "Newer Ideals of Peace," and he had yawned over it
undisguisedly. Then he had brought this novel, and--well, she had balked
at the second chapter, and he had kissed her and called her his "little
prude." She did not want to be a prude; she hated to seem so, and had
for some time prided herself on emancipation from narrow New England
prejudices. For example, she had not objected to wine at dinner; it had
seemed indeed rather fine, imparting, as it did, an old-fashioned
flavor; but she did not like the whiskey, and Harry at times appeared to
become just a bit too lively--nothing excessive, of course, but his eyes
and the smell and the color were a little too suggestive. And yet he was
so kind and good, and when he came in at evening he bent so gallantly
for his kiss, and laid fresh flowers before her: could anything have
been more thoughtful and knightly?

Just here again she was puzzled; with her folk, hard work and inflexible
duty were of prime importance; they were the rock foundation; and she
somehow had always counted on the courtesies of life as added to them,
making them sweet and beautiful. But in this world, not perhaps so much
with Harry as with others of his set, the depths beneath the gravely
inclined head, the deferential smile and ceremonious action, the light
clever converse, had sounded strangely hollow once or twice when she had
essayed to sound them, and a certain fear to look and see possessed her.

The bell rang, and she was a little startled at the fright that struck
her heart. She did not analyze it. In reality--pride forbade her to
admit it--she feared it was a call of some of Harry's friends: some
languid, assured Southern ladies, perilously gowned, with veiled disdain
for this interloping Northerner and her strong mind. Especially was
there one from New Orleans, tall and dark--

But it was no caller. It was simply some one named Stillings to see Mr.
Cresswell. She went down to see him--he might be a constituent--and
found a smirky brown man, very apologetic.

"You don't know me--does you, Mrs. Cresswell?" said Stillings. He knew
when it was diplomatic to forget his grammar and assume his dialect.

"Why--no."

"You remember I worked for Mr. Harry and served you-all lunch one day."

"Oh, yes--why, yes! I remember now very well."

"Well, I wants to see Mr. Harry very much; could I wait in the back
hall?"

Mary started to have him wait in the front hall, but she thought better
of it and had him shown back. Less than an hour later her husband
entered and she went quickly to him. He looked worn and white and tired,
but he laughed her concern lightly off.

"I'll be in earlier tonight," he declared.

"Is the Congressional business very heavy?"

He laughed so hilariously that she felt uncomfortable, which he
observed.

"Oh, no," he answered deftly; "not very." And as they moved toward the
dining-room Mary changed the subject.

"Oh," she exclaimed, suddenly remembering. "There is a man--a colored
man--waiting to see you in the back hall, but I guess he can wait until
after lunch."

They ate leisurely.

"There's going to be racing out at the park this evening," said Harry.
"Want to go?"

"I was going to hear an art lecture at the Club," Mary returned, and
grew thoughtful; for here walked her ghost again. Of course, the Club
was an affair with more of gossip than of intellectual effort, but
today, largely through her own suggestion, an art teacher of European
reputation was going to lecture, and Mary preferred it to the company of
the race track. And--just as certainly--her husband didn't.

"Don't forget the man, dear," she reminded him; but he was buried in his
paper, frowning.

"Look at that," he said finally. She glanced at the
head-lines--"Prominent Negro Politician Candidate for High Office at
Hands of New Administration. B. Alwyn of Alabama."

"Why, it's Bles!" she said, her face lighting as his darkened.

"An impudent Negro," he voiced his disgust. "If they must appoint
darkies why can't they get tractable ones like my nigger Stillings."

"Stillings?" she repeated. "Why, he's the man that's waiting."

"Sam, is it? Used to be one of our servants--you remember? Wants to
borrow more money, I presume." He went down-stairs, after first helping
himself to a glass of whiskey, and then gallantly kissing his wife. Mrs.
Cresswell was more unsatisfied than usual. She could not help feeling
that Mr. Cresswell was treating her about as he treated his wine--as an
indulgence; a loved one, a regular one, but somehow not as the reality
and prose of life, unless--she started at the thought--his life was all
indulgence. Having nothing else to do, she went out and paraded the
streets, watching the people who were happy enough to be busy.

Cresswell and Stillings had a long conference, and when Stillings
hastened away he could not forbear cutting a discreet pigeon-wing as he
rounded the corner. He had been promised the backing of the whole
Southern delegation in his schemes.

That night Teerswell called on him in his modest lodgings, where over
hot whiskey and water they talked.

"The damned Southern upstart," growled Teerswell, forgetting Stillings'
birth-place. "Do you mean to say he's actually slated for the place?"

"He's sure of it, unless something turns up."

"Well, who'd have dreamed it?" Teerswell mixed another stiff dram.

"And that isn't all," came Sam Stillings' unctuous voice.

Teerswell glanced at him. "What else?" he asked, pausing with the
steaming drink poised aloft.

"If I'm not mistaken, Alwyn intends to marry Miss Wynn."

"You lie!" the other suddenly yelled with an oath, overturning his
tumbler and striding across the floor. "Do you suppose she'd look at
that black--"

"Well, see here," said the astute Stillings, checking the details upon
his fingers. "They visit Senator Smith's together; he takes her home
from the Treble Clef; they say he talked to nobody else at her party;
she recommends him for the campaign--"

"What!" Teerswell again exploded. But Stillings continued smoothly:

"Oh, I have ways of finding things out. She corresponds with him during
the campaign; she asks Smith to make him Register; and he calls on her
every night."

Teerswell sat down limply.

"I see," he groaned. "It's all up. She's jilted me--and I--and I--"

"I don't see as it's all up yet," Stillings tried to reassure him.

"But didn't you say they were engaged?"

"I think they are; but--well, you know Carrie Wynn better than I do:
suppose, now--suppose he should lose the appointment?"

"But you say that's sure."

"Unless something turns up."

"But what _can_ turn up?"

"We might turn something."

"What--what--I tell you man, I'd--I'd do anything to down that nigger. I
hate him. If you'll help me I'll do anything for you."

Stillings arose and carefully opening the hall door peered out. Then he
came back and, seating himself close to Teerswell, pushed aside the
whiskey.

"Teerswell," he whispered, "you know I was working to be Register of the
Treasury. Well, now, when the scheme of making Alwyn Treasurer came up
they determined to appoint a Southern white Republican and give me a
place under Alwyn. Now, if Alwyn fails to land I've got no chance for
the bigger place, but I've got a good chance to be Register according to
the first plan. I helped in the campaign; I've got the Negro secret
societies backing me and--I don't mind telling you--the solid Southern
Congressional delegation. I'm trying now ostensibly for a
chief-clerkship under Bles, and I'm pretty sure of it: it pays
twenty-five hundred. See here: if we can make Bles do some fool talking
and get it into the papers, he'll be ditched, and I'll be Register."

"Great!" shouted Teerswell.

"Wait--wait. Now, if I get the job, how would you like to be my
assistant?"

"Like it? Why, great Jehoshaphat! I'd marry Carrie--but how can I help
you?"

"This way. I want to be better known among influential Negroes. You
introduce me and let me make myself solid. Especially I must get in Miss
Wynn's set so that both of us can watch her and Alwyn, and make her
friends ours."

"I'll do it--shake!" And Stillings put his oily hand into Teerswell's
nervous grip.

"Now, here," Stillings went on, "you stow all that jealousy and heavy
tragedy. Treat Alwyn well and call on Miss Wynn as usual--see?"

"It's a hard pill--but all right."

"Leave the rest to me; I'm hand in glove with Alwyn. I'll put stuff into
him that'll make him wave the bloody shirt at the next meeting of the
Bethel Literary--see? Then I'll go to Cresswell and say, 'Dangerous
nigger--, just as I told you.' He'll begin to move things. You see?
Cresswell is in with Smith--both directors in the big Cotton
Combine--and Smith will call Alwyn down. Then we'll think further."

"Stillings, you look like a fool, but you're a genius." And Teerswell
fairly hugged him. A few more details settled, and some more whiskey
consumed, and Teerswell went home at midnight in high spirits. Stillings
looked into the glass and scowled.

"Look like a fool, do I?" he mused. "Well, I ain't!"

Congressman Cresswell was stirred to his first political activity by the
hint given him through Stillings. He not only had a strong personal
dislike for Alwyn, but he regarded the promise to him of a high office
as a menace to the South.

The second speech which Alwyn made at the Bethel Literary was, as
Stillings foresaw, a reply to the stinging criticisms of certain colored
papers engineered by Teerswell, who said that Alwyn had been bribed to
remain loyal to the Republicans by a six thousand dollar office. Alwyn
had been cut to the quick, and his reply was a straight out defence of
Negro rights and a call to the Republican Party to redeem its pledges.

Caroline Wynn, seeing the rocks for which her political craft was
headed, adroitly steered several newspaper reports into the waste
basket, but Stillings saw to it that a circumstantial account was in the
_Colored American_, and that a copy of this paper was in Congressman
Cresswell's hands. Cresswell lost no time in calling on Senator Smith
and pointing out to him that Bles Alwyn was a dangerous Negro: seeking
social equality, hating white people, and scheming to make trouble. He
was too young and heady. It would be fatal to give such a man office and
influence; fatal for the development of the South, and bad for the
Cotton Combine.

Senator Smith was unconvinced. Alwyn struck him as a well-balanced
fellow, and he thought he deserved the office. He would, however, warn
him to make no further speeches like that of last night. Cresswell
mentioned Stillings as a good, inoffensive Negro who knew his place and
could be kept track of.

"Stillings is a good man," admitted Smith; "but Alwyn is better.
However, I'll bear what you say in mind."

Cresswell found Mr. Easterly in Mrs. Vanderpool's parlor, and that
gentleman was annoyed at the news.

"I especially picked out this Alwyn because he was Southern and
tractable, and seemed to have sense enough to know how to say well what
we wanted to say."

"When, as a matter of fact," drawled Mrs. Vanderpool, "he was simply
honest."

"The South won't stand it," Cresswell decisively affirmed.

"Well--" began Mr. Easterly.

"See here," interrupted Mrs. Vanderpool. "I'm interested in Alwyn; in
fact, an honest man in politics, even if he is black, piques my
curiosity. Give him a chance and I'll warrant he'll develop all the
desirable traits of a first class office-holder."

Easterly hesitated. "We must not offend the South, and we must placate
the Negroes," he said.

"The right sort of Negro--one like Stillings--appointed to a reasonable
position, would do both," opined Cresswell.

"It evidently didn't," Mrs. Vanderpool interjected.

Cresswell arose. "I tell you, Mr. Easterly, I object--it mustn't go
through." He took his leave.

Mrs. Vanderpool did not readily give up her plea for Alwyn, and bade
Zora get Mr. Smith on the telephone for discussion.

"Well," reported Easterly, hanging up the receiver, "we may land him. It
seems that he is engaged to a Washington school-teacher, and Smith says
she has him well in hand. She's a pretty shrewd proposition, and
understands that Alwyn's only chance now lies in keeping his mouth shut.
We may land him," he repeated.

"Engaged!" gasped Mrs. Vanderpool.

Zora quietly closed the door.




_Twenty-seven_

THE VISION OF ZORA


How Zora found the little church she never knew; but somehow, in the
long dark wanderings which she had fallen into the habit of taking at
nightfall, she stood one evening before it. It looked warm, and she was
cold. It was full of her people, and she was very, very lonely. She sat
in a back seat, and saw with unseeing eyes. She said again, as she had
said to herself a hundred times, that it was all right and just what she
had expected. What else could she have dreamed? That he should ever
marry her was beyond possibility; that had been settled long
since--there where the tall, dark pines, wan with the shades of evening,
cast their haunting shadows across the Silver Fleece and half hid the
blood-washed west. After _that_ he would marry some one else, of course;
some good and pure woman who would help and uplift and serve him.

She had dreamed that she would help--unknown, unseen--and perhaps she
had helped a little through Mrs. Vanderpool. It was all right, and yet
why so suddenly had the threads of life let go? Why was she drifting in
vast waters; in uncharted wastes of sea? Why was the puzzle of life
suddenly so intricate when but a little week ago she was reading it, and
its beauty and wisdom and power were thrilling her delighted hands?
Could it be possible that all unconsciously she had dared dream a
forbidden dream? No, she had always rejected it. When no one else had
the right; when no one thought; when no one cared, she had hovered over
his soul as some dark guardian angel; but now, now somebody else was
receiving his gratitude. It was all right, she supposed; but she, the
outcast child of the swamp, what was there for her to do in the great
world--her, the burden of whose sin--

But then came the voice of the preacher: _"Behold the Lamb of God, that
taketh away the sin of the world_."

She found herself all at once intently listening. She had been to church
many times before, but under the sermons and ceremonies she had always
sat coldly inert. In the South the cries, contortions, and religious
frenzy left her mind untouched; she did not laugh or mock, she simply
sat and watched and wondered. At the North, in the white churches, she
enjoyed the beauty of wall, windows, and hymn, liked the voice and
surplice of the preacher; but his words had no reference to anything in
which she was interested. Here suddenly came an earnest voice addressed,
by singular chance, to her of all the world.

She listened, bending forward, her eyes glued to the speaker's lips and
letting no word drop. He had the build and look of the fanatic: thin to
emancipation; brown; brilliant-eyed; his words snapped in nervous energy
and rang in awful earnestness.

"Life is sin, and sin is sorrow. Sorrow is born of selfishness and
self-seeking--our own good, our own happiness, our own glory. As if any
one of us were worth a life! No, never. A single self as an end is, and
ought to be, disappointment; it is too low; it is nothing. Only in a
whole world of selves, infinite, endless, eternal world on worlds of
selves--only in their vast good is true salvation. The good of others
is our true good; work for others; not for your salvation, but the
salvation of the world." The audience gave a low uneasy groan and the
minister in whose pulpit the stranger preached stirred uneasily. But he
went on tensely, with flying words:

"Unselfishness is sacrifice--Jesus was supreme sacrifice." ("Amen,"
screamed a voice.) "In your dark lives," he cried, "_who_ is the King of
Glory? Sacrifice. Lift up your heads, then, ye gates of prejudice and
hate, and let the King of Glory come in. Forget yourselves and your
petty wants, and behold your starving people. The wail of black millions
sweeps the air--east and west they cry, Help! Help! Are you dumb? Are
you blind? Do you dance and laugh, and hear and see not? The cry of
death is in the air; they murder, burn, and maim us!" ("Oh--oh--" moaned
the people swaying in their seats.) "When we cry they mock us; they ruin
our women and debauch our children--what shall we do?

"Behold the Lamb of God that taketh away sin. Behold the Supreme
Sacrifice that makes us clean. Give up your pleasures; give up your
wants; give up all to the weak and wretched of our people. Go down to
Pharaoh and smite him in God's name. Go down to the South where we
writhe. Strive--work--build--hew--lead--inspire! God calls. Will you
hear? Come to Jesus. The harvest is waiting. Who will cry: 'Here am I,
send me!'"

Zora rose and walked up the aisle; she knelt before the altar and
answered the call: "Here am I--send me."

And then she walked out. Above her sailed the same great stars; around
her hummed the same hoarse city; but within her soul sang some new song
of peace.

"What is the matter, Zora?" Mrs. Vanderpool inquired, for she seemed to
see in the girl's face and carriage some subtle change; something that
seemed to tell how out of the dream had stepped the dreamer into the
realness of things; how suddenly the seeker saw; how to the wanderer,
the Way was opened.

Just how she sensed this Mrs. Vanderpool could not have explained, nor
could Zora. Was there a change, sudden, cataclysmic? No. There were to
come in future days all the old doubts and shiverings, the old restless
cry: "It is all right--all right!" But more and more, above the doubt
and beyond the unrest, rose the great end, the mighty ideal, that
flickered and wavered, but ever grew and waxed strong, until it became
possible, and through it all things else were possible. Thus from the
grave of youth and love, amid the soft, low singing of dark and bowed
worshippers, the Angel of the Resurrection rolled away the stone.

"What is the matter, Zora?" Mrs. Vanderpool repeated.

Zora looked up, almost happily--standing poised on her feet as if to
tell of strength and purpose.

"I have found the Way," she cried joyously.

Mrs. Vanderpool gave her a long searching look.

"Where have you been?" she asked. "I've been waiting."

"I'm sorry--but I've been--converted." And she told her story.

"Pshaw, Zora!" Mrs. Vanderpool uttered impatiently. "He's a fakir."

"Maybe," said Zora serenely and quietly; "but he brought the Word."

"Zora, don't talk cant; it isn't worthy of your intelligence."

"It was more than intelligent--it was true."

"Zora--listen, child! You were wrought up tonight, nervous--wild. You
were happy to meet your people, and where he said one word you supplied
two. What you attribute to him is the voice of your own soul."

But Zora merely smiled. "All you say may be true. But what does it
matter? I know one thing, like the man in the Bible: 'Whereas I was
blind now I see.'"

Mrs. Vanderpool gave a little helpless gesture. "And what shall you do?"
she asked.

"I'm going back South to work for my people."

"When?" The old careworn look stole across Mrs. Vanderpool's features.

Zora came gently forward and slipped her arms lovingly about the other
woman's neck.

"Not right off," she said gently; "not until I learn more. I hate to
leave you, but--it calls!"

Mrs. Vanderpool held the dark girl close and began craftily:

"You see, Zora, the more you know the more you can do."

"Yes."

"And if you are determined I will see that you are taught. You must know
settlement-work and reform movements; not simply here but--" she
hesitated--"in England--in France."

"Will it take long?" Zora asked, smoothing the lady's hair.

Mrs. Vanderpool considered. "No--five years is not long; it is all too
short."

"Five years: it is very long; but there is a great deal to learn. Must I
study five years?"

Mrs. Vanderpool threw back her head.

"Zora, I am selfish I know, but five years truly is none too long. Then,
too, Zora, we have work to do in that time."

"What?"

"There is Alwyn's career," and Mrs. Vanderpool looked into Zora's eyes.

The girl did not shrink, but she paused.

"Yes," she said slowly, "we must help him."

"And after he rises--"

"He will marry."

"Whom?"

"The woman he loves," returned Zora, quietly.

"Yes--that is best," sighed Mrs. Vanderpool. "But how shall we help
him?"

"Make him Treasurer of the United States without sacrificing his
manhood or betraying his people."

"I can do that," said Mrs. Vanderpool slowly.

"It will cost something," said Zora.

"I will do it," was the lady's firm assurance. Zora kissed her.

The next afternoon Mrs. Cresswell went down to a white social settlement
of which Congressman Todd had spoken, where a meeting of the Civic Club
was to be held. She had come painfully to realize that if she was to
have a career she must make it for herself. The plain, unwelcome truth
was that her husband had no great interests in life in which she could
find permanent pleasure. Companionship and love there was and, she told
herself, always would be; but in some respects their lives must flow in
two streams. Last night, for the second time, she had irritated him; he
had spoken almost harshly to her, and she knew she must brood or work
today. And so she hunted work, eagerly.

She felt the atmosphere the moment she entered. There were carelessly
gowned women and men smart and shabby, but none of them were thinking of
clothes nor even of one another. They had great deeds in mind; they were
scanning the earth; they were toiling for men. The same grim excitement
that sends smaller souls hunting for birds and rabbits and lions, had
sent them hunting the enemies of mankind: they were bent to the chase,
scenting the game, knowing the infinite meaning of their hunt and the
glory of victory. Mary Cresswell had listened but a half hour before her
world seemed so small and sordid and narrow, so trivial, that a sense of
shame spread over her. These people were not only earnest, but expert.
They acknowledged the need of Mr. Todd's educational bill.

"But the Republicans are going to side-track it; I have that on the best
authority," said one.

"True; but can't we force them to it?"

"Only by political power, and they've just won a campaign."

"They won it by Negro votes, and the Negro who secured the votes is
eager for this bill; he's a fine, honest fellow."

"Very well; work with him; and when we can be of real service let us
know. Meantime, this Child Labor bill is different. It's bound to pass.
Both parties are back of it, and public opinion is aroused. Now our work
is to force amendments enough to make the bill effective."

Discussion followed; not flamboyant and declamatory, but tense,
staccato, pointed. Mrs. Cresswell found herself taking part. Someone
mentioned her name, and one or two glances of interest and even
curiosity were thrown her way. Congressmen's wives were rare at the
Civic Club.

Congressmen Todd urged Mrs. Cresswell to stay after the discussion and
attend a meeting of the managers and workers of the Washington social
settlements.

"Have you many settlements?" she inquired.

"Three in all--two white and one colored."

"And will they all be represented?"

"Yes, of course, Mrs. Cresswell. If you object to meeting the colored
people--"

Mrs. Cresswell blushed.

"No, indeed," she answered; "I used to teach colored people."

She watched this new group gather: a business man, two fashionable
ladies, three college girls, a gray-haired colored woman, and a young
spectacled brown man, and then, to her surprise, Mrs. Vanderpool and
Zora.

Zora was scarcely seated when that strange sixth sense of hers told her
that something had happened, and it needed but a side-glance from Mrs.
Vanderpool to indicate what it was. She sat with folded hands and the
old dreamy look in her eyes. In one moment she lived it all again--the
red cabin, the moving oak, the sowing of the Fleece, and its fearful
reaping. And now, when she turned her head, she would see the woman who
was to marry Bles Alwyn. She had often dreamed of her, and had set a
high ideal. She wanted her to be handsome, well dressed, earnest and
good. She felt a sort of person proprietorship in her, and when at last
the quickened pulse died to its regular healthy beat, she turned and
looked and knew.

Caroline Wynn deemed it a part of the white world's education to
participate in meetings like this; doing so was not pleasant, but it
appealed to her cynicism and mocking sense of pleasure. She always
roused hostility as she entered: her gown was too handsome, her gloves
too spotless, her air had hauteur enough to be almost impudent in the
opinion of most white people. Then gradually her intelligence, her cool
wit and self-possession, would conquer and she would go gracefully out
leaving a rather bewildered audience behind. She sat today with her dark
gold profile toward Zora, and the girl looked and was glad. She was such
a woman she would have Bles marry. She was glad, and she choked back the
sob that struggled and fought in her throat.

The meeting never got beyond a certain constraint. The Congressman made
an excellent speech; there were various sets of figures read by the
workers; and Miss Wynn added a touch of spice by several pertinent
questions and comments. Then, as the meeting broke up and Mrs. Cresswell
came forward to speak to Zora, Mrs. Vanderpool managed to find herself
near Miss Wynn and to be introduced. They exchanged a few polite
phrases, fencing delicately to test the other's wrist and interest. They
touched on the weather, and settlement work; but Miss Wynn did not
propose to be stranded on the Negro problem.

"I suppose the next bit of excitement will be in the inauguration," she
said to Mrs. Vanderpool.

"I understand it will be unusually elaborate," returned Mrs. Vanderpool,
a little surprised at the turn. Then she added pleasantly: "I think I
shall see it through, from speech to ball."

"Yes, I do usually," Miss Wynn asserted, adjusting her furs.

Mrs. Vanderpool was further surprised. Did colored people attend the
ball?

"We sorely need a national ball-room," she said. "Isn't the census
building wretched?"

"I do not know," smiled Miss Wynn.

"Oh, I thought you said--"

"I meant _our_ ball."

"Oh!" said Mrs. Vanderpool in turn. "Oh!" Here a thought came. Of
course, the colored people had their own ball; she remembered having
heard about it. Why not send Zora? She plunged in:

"Miss Wynn, I have a maid--such an intelligent girl; I do wish she could
attend your ball--" seeing her blunder, she paused. Miss Wynn was coolly
buttoning her glove.

"Yes," she acknowledged politely, "few of us can afford maids, and
therefore we do not usually arrange for them; but I think we can have
your _protÃ©gÃ©e_ look on from the gallery. Good-afternoon."

As Mrs. Vanderpool drove home she related the talk to Zora. Zora was
silent at first. Then she said deliberately:

"Miss Wynn was right."

"Why, Zora!"

"Did Helene attend the ball four years ago?"

"But, Zora, must you folk ape our nonsense as well as our sense?"

"You force us to," said Zora.




_Twenty-eight_

THE ANNUNCIATION


The new President had been inaugurated. Beneath the creamy pile of the
old Capitol, and facing the new library, he had stood aloft and looked
down on a waving sea of faces--black-coated, jostling, eager-eyed fellow
creatures. They had watched his lips move, had scanned eagerly his dress
and the gowned and decorated dignitaries beside him; and then, with
blare of band and prancing of horses, he had been whirled down the dip
and curve of that long avenue, with its medley of meanness and thrift
and hurry and wealth, until, swinging sharply, the dim walls of the
White House rose before him. He entered with a sigh.

Then the vast welter of humanity dissolved and streamed hither and
thither, gaping and laughing until night, when thousands poured into the
red barn of the census shack and entered the artificial fairyland
within. The President walked through, smiling; the senators protected
their friends in the crush; and Harry Cresswell led his wife to a
little oasis of Southern ladies and gentlemen.

"This is democracy for you," said he, wiping his brow.

From a whirling eddy Mrs. Vanderpool waved at them, and they rescued
her.

"I think I am ready to go," she gasped. "Did you ever!"

"Come," Cresswell invited. But just then the crowd pushed them apart and
shot them along, and Mrs. Cresswell found herself clinging to her
husband amid two great whirling variegated throngs of driving,
white-faced people. The band crashed and blared; the people laughed and
pushed; and with rhythmic sound and swing the mighty throng was dancing.

It took much effort, but at last the Cresswell party escaped and rolled
off in their carriages. They swept into the avenue and out again, then
up 14th Street, where, turning for some street obstruction, they passed
a throng of carriages on a cross street.

"It's the other ball," cried Mrs. Vanderpool, and amid laughter she
added, "Let's go!"

It was--the other ball. For Washington is itself, and something else
besides. Along beside it ever runs that dark and haunting echo; that
shadowy world-in-world with its accusing silence, its emphatic
self-sufficiency. Mrs. Cresswell at first demurred. She thought of
Elspeth's cabin: the dirt, the smell, the squalor: of course, this would
be different; but--well, Mrs. Cresswell had little inclination for
slumming. She was interested in the under-world, but intellectually, not
by personal contact. She did not know that this was a side-world, not an
under-world. Yet the imposing building did not look sordid.

"Hired?" asked some one.

"No, owned."

"Indeed!"

Then there was a hitch.

"Tickets?"

"Where can we buy them?"

"Not on sale," was the curt reply.

"Actually exclusive!" sneered Cresswell, for he could not imagine any
one unwelcome at a Negro ball. Then he bethought himself of Sam
Stillings and sent for him. In a few minutes he had a dozen
complimentary tickets in his hand.

They entered the balcony and sat down. Mary Cresswell leaned forward. It
was interesting. Beneath her was an ordinary pretty ball--flowered,
silked, and ribboned; with swaying whirling figures, music, and
laughter, and all the human fun of gayety and converse.

And then she was impressed with the fact that this was no ordinary
scene; it was, on the contrary, most extraordinary.

There was a black man waltzing with a white woman--no, she was not
white, for Mary caught the cream and curl of the girl as she swept past:
but there was a white man (was he white?) and a black woman. The color
of the scene was wonderful. The hard human white seemed to glow and live
and run a mad gamut of the spectrum, from morn till night, from white to
black; through red and sombre browns, pale and brilliant yellows, dead
and living blacks. Through her opera-glasses Mary scanned their hair;
she noted everything from the infinitely twisted, crackled, dead, and
grayish-black to the piled mass of red golden sunlight. Her eyes went
dreaming; there below was the gathering of the worlds. She saw types of
all nations and all lands swirling beneath her in human brotherhood, and
a great wonder shook her. They seemed so happy. Surely, this was no
nether world; it was upper earth, and--her husband beckoned; he had been
laughing incontinently. He saw nothing but a crowd of queer looking
people doing things they were not made to do and appearing absurdly
happy over it. It irritated him unreasonably.

"See the washer-woman in red," he whispered. "Look at the monkey. Come,
let's go."

They trooped noisily down-stairs, and Cresswell walked unceremoniously
between a black man and his partner. Mrs. Vanderpool recognized and
greeted the girl as Miss Wynn. Mrs. Cresswell did not notice her, but
she paused with a start of recognition at the sight of the man.

"Why, Bles!" she exclaimed impetuously, starting to hold out her hand.
She was sincerely pleased at seeing him. Then she remembered. She bowed
and smiled, looking at him with interest and surprise. He was correctly
dressed, and the white shirt set off the comeliness of his black face in
compelling contrast. He carried himself like a man, and bowed with
gravity and dignity. She passed on and heard her husband's petulant
voice in her ear.

"Mary--Mary! for Heaven's sake, come on; don't shake hands with
niggers."

It was recurring flashes of temper like this, together with evidences of
dubious company and a growing fondness for liquor, that drove Mary
Cresswell more and more to find solace in the work of Congressman Todd's
Civic Club. She collected statistics for several of the Committee, wrote
letters, interviewed a few persons, and felt herself growing in
usefulness and importance. She did not mention these things to her
husband; she knew he would not object, but she shrank from his ridicule.

The various causes advocated by the Civic Club felt the impetus of the
aggressive work of the organization. This was especially the case with
the National Education Bill and the amendment to the Child Labor Bill.
The movement became strong enough to call Mr. Easterly down from New
York. He and the inner circle went over matters carefully.

"We need the political strength of the South," said Easterly; "not only
in framing national legislation in our own interests, but always in
State laws. Particularly, we must get them into line to offset Todd's
foolishness. The Child Labor Bill must either go through unamended or be
killed. The Cotton Inspection Bill--our chief measure--must be slipped
through quietly by Southern votes, while in the Tariff mix-up we must
take good care of cotton.

"Now, on the other hand, we are offending the Southerners in three ways:
Todd's revived Blair Bill is too good a thing for niggers; the South is
clamoring for a first classy embassy appointment; and the President's
nomination of Alwyn as Treasurer will raise a howl from Virginia to
Texas."

"There is some strong influence back of Alwyn," said Senator Smith; "not
only are the Negroes enthused, but the President has daily letters from
prominent whites."

"The strong influence is named Vanderpool," Easterly drily remarked.
"She's playing a bigger political game than I laid out for her. That's
the devil with women: they can't concentrate: they get too damned many
side issues. Now, I offered her husband the French ambassadorship
provided she'd keep the Southerners feeling good toward us. She's hand
in glove with the Southerners, all right; but she wants not only her
husband's appointment but this darkey's too."

"But that's been decided, hasn't it?" put in Smith.

"Yes," grumbled Easterly; "but it makes it hard already. At any rate,
the Educational Bill must be killed right off. No more talk; no more
consideration--kill it, and kill it now. Now about this Child Labor
Bill: Todd's Civic Club is raising the mischief. Who's responsible?"

The silent Jackson spoke up. "Congressman Cresswell's wife has been very
active, and Todd thinks they've got the South with them."

"Congressman Cresswell's wife!" Easterly's face was one great
exclamation point. "Now what the devil does this mean?"

"I'm afraid," said Senator Smith, "that it may mean an attempt on the
part of Cresswell's friends to boost him for the French ambassadorship.
He's the only Southerner with money enough to support the position, and
there's been a good deal of quiet talk, I understand, in Southern
circles."

"But it's treason!" Easterly shouted. "It will ruin the plans of the
Combine to put this amended Child Labor Bill through. John Taylor has
just written me that he's starting mills at Toomsville, and that he
depends on unrestricted labor conditions, as we must throughout the
South. Doesn't Cresswell know this?"

"Of course. I think it's just a bluff. If he gets the appointment he'll
let the bill drop."

"I see--everybody is raising his price, is he? Pretty soon the darky
will be holding us up. Well, see Cresswell, and put it to him strong. I
must go. Wire me."

Senator Smith presented the matter bluntly to Cresswell as soon as he
saw him. "Which would the South prefer--Todd's Education Bill, or
Alwyn's appointment?"

It was characteristic of Cresswell that the smaller matter of Stillings'
intrigue should interest him more than Todd's measure, of which he knew
nothing.

"What is Todd's bill?" asked Harry Cresswell, darkening.

Smith, surprised, got out a copy and explained. Cresswell interrupted
before he was half through.

"Don't you see," he said angrily, "that that will ruin our plans for the
Cotton Combine?"

"Yes, I do," replied Smith; "but it will not do the immediate harm that
the amended Child Labor Bill will do."

"What's that?" demanded Cresswell, frowning again.

Senator Smith regarded him again: was Cresswell playing a shrewd game?

"Why," he said at length, "aren't you promoting it?"

"No," was the reply. "Never heard of it."

"But," Senator Smith began, and paused. He turned and took up a circular
issued by the Civic Club, giving a careful account of their endeavors to
amend and pass the Child Labor Bill. Cresswell read it, then threw it
aside.

"Nonsense!" he indignantly repudiated the measure. "That will never do;
it's as bad as the Education Bill."

"But your wife is encouraging it and we thought you were back of it."

Cresswell stared in blank amazement.

"My wife!" he gasped. Then he bethought himself. "It's a mistake," he
supplemented; "Mrs. Cresswell gave them no authority to sign her name."

"She's been very active," Smith persisted, "and naturally we were all
anxious."

Cresswell bit his lip. "I shall speak to her; she does not realize what
use they are making of her passing interest."

He hurried away, and Senator Smith felt a bit sorry for Mrs. Cresswell
when he recalled the expression on her husband's face.

Mary Cresswell did not get home until nearly dinner time; then she came
in glowing with enthusiasm. Her work had received special commendation
that afternoon, and she had been asked to take the chairmanship of the
committee on publicity. Finding that her husband was at home, she
determined to tell him--it was so good to be doing something worth
while. Perhaps, too, he might be made to show some interest. She thought
of Mr. and Mrs. Todd and the old dream glowed faintly again.

Cresswell looked at her as she entered the library where he was waiting
and smoking. She was rumpled and muddy, with flying hair and thick
walking shoes and the air of bustle and vigor which had crept into her
blood this last month. Truly, her cheeks were glowing and her eyes
bright, but he disapproved. Softness and daintiness, silk and lace and
glimmering flesh, belonged to women in his mind, and he despised Amazons
and "business" women. He received her kiss coldly, and Mary's heart
sank. She essayed some gay greeting, but he interrupted her.

"What's this stuff about the Civic Club?" he began sharply.

"Stuff?" she queried, blankly.

"That's what I said."

"I'm sure I don't know," she answered stiffly. "I belong to the Civic
Club, and have been working with it."

"Why didn't you tell me?" His resentment grew as he proceeded.

"I did not think you were interested."

"Didn't you know that this Child Labor business was opposed to my
interests?"

"Dear, I did not dream it. It's a Republican bill, to be sure; but you
seemed very friendly with Senator Smith, who introduced it. We were
simply trying to improve it."

"Suppose we didn't want it improved."

"That's what some said; but I did not believe such--deception."

The blood rushed to Cresswell's face.

"Well, you will drop this bill and the Civic Club from now on."

"Why?"

"Because I say so," he retorted explosively, too angry to explain
further.


She looked at him--a long, fixed, penetrating look which revealed more
than she had ever seen before, then turned away and went slowly
up-stairs. She did not come down to dinner, and in the evening the
doctor was called.

Cresswell drooped a bit after eating, hesitated, and reflected. He had
acted too cavalierly in this Civic Club mess, he concluded, and yet he
would not back down. He'd go see her and pet her a bit, but be firm.

He opened her boudoir door gently, and she stood before him radiant,
clothed in silk and lace, her hair loosened. He paused, astonished. But
she threw herself upon his neck, with a joyful, half hysterical cry.

"I will give it all up--everything! Willingly, willingly!" Her voice
dropped abruptly to a tremulous whisper. "Oh, Harry! I--I am to be the
mother of a child!"




_Twenty-nine_

A MASTER OF FATE


"There is not the slightest doubt, Miss Wynn," Senator Smith was saying,
"but that the schools of the District will be reorganized."

"And the Board of Education abolished?" she added.

"Yes. The power will be delegated to a single white superintendent."

The vertical line in Caroline Wynn's forehead became pronounced.

"Whose work is this, Senator?" she asked.

"Well, there are, of course, various parties back of the change: the
'outs,' the reformers, the whole tendency to concentrate responsibility,
and so on. But, frankly, the deciding factor was the demand of the
South."

"Is there anything in Washington that the South does not already own?"

Senator Smith smiled thinly.

"Not much," drily; "but we own the South."

"And part of the price is putting the colored schools of the District in
the hands of a Southern man and depriving us of all voice in their
control?"

"Precisely, Miss Wynn. But you'd be surprised to know that it was the
Negroes themselves who stirred the South to this demand."

"Not at all; you mean the colored newspapers, I presume."

"The same, with Teerswell's clever articles; then his partner Stillings
worked the 'impudent Negro teacher' argument on Cresswell until
Cresswell was wild to get the South in control of the schools."

"But what do Teerswell and Stillings want?"

"They want Bles Alwyn to make a fool of himself."

"That is a trifle cryptic," Miss Wynn mused. The Senator amplified.

"We are giving the South the Washington schools and killing the
Education Bill in return for this support of some of our measures and
their assent to Alwyn's appointment. You see I speak frankly."

"I can stand it, Senator."

"I believe you can. Well, now, if Alwyn should act unwisely and offend
the South, somebody else stands in line for the appointment."

"As Treasurer?" she asked in surprise.

"Oh, no, they are too shrewd to ask that; it would offend their backers,
or shall I say their tools, the Southerners. No, they ask only to be
Register and Assistant Register of the Treasury. This is an office
colored men have held for years, and it is quite ambitious enough for
them; so Stillings assures Cresswell and his friends."

"I see," Miss Wynn slowly acknowledged. "But how do they hope to make
Mr. Alwyn blunder?"

"Too easily, I fear--unless _you_ are very careful. Alwyn has been
working like a beaver for the National Education Bill. He's been in to
see me several times, as you probably know. His heart is set on it. He
regards its passage as a sort of vindication of his defence of the
party."

"Yes."

"Now, the party has dropped the bill for good, and Alwyn doesn't like
it. If he should attack the party--"

"But he wouldn't," cried Miss Wynn with a start that belied her
conviction.

"Did you know that he is to be invited to make the principal address to
the graduates of the colored high-school?"

"But," she objected. "They have selected Bishop Johnson; I--"

"I know you did," laughed the Senator, "but the Judge got orders from
higher up."

"Shrewd Mr. Teerswell," remarked Miss Wynn, sagely.

"Shrewd Mr. Stillings," the Senator corrected; "but perhaps too shrewd.
Suppose Mr. Alwyn should take this occasion to make a thorough defence
of the party?"

"But--will he?"

"That's where you come in," Senator Smith pointed out, rising, "and the
real reason of this interview. We're depending on you to pull the party
out of an awkward hole," and he shook hands with his caller.

Miss Wynn walked slowly up Pennsylvania Avenue with a smile on her face.

"I did not give him the credit," she declared, repeating it; "I did not
give him the credit. Here I was, playing an alluring game on the side,
and my dear Tom transforms it into a struggle for bread and butter; for
of course, if the Board of Education goes, I lose my place." She lifted
her head and stared along the avenue.

A bitterness dawned in her eyes. The whole street was a living insult to
her. Here she was, an American girl by birth and breeding, a daughter of
citizens who had fought and bled and worked for a dozen generations on
this soil; yet if she stepped into this hotel to rest, even with full
purse, she would be politely refused accommodation. Should she attempt
to go into this picture show she would be denied entrance. She was
thirsty with the walk; but at yonder fountain the clerk would roughly
refuse to serve her. It was lunch time; there was no place within a mile
where she was allowed to eat. The revolt deepened within her. Beyond
these known and definite discriminations lay the unknown and hovering.
In yonder store nothing hindered the clerk from being exceptionally
pert; on yonder street-car the conductor might reserve his politeness
for white folk; this policeman's business was to keep black and brown
people in their places. All this Caroline Wynn thought of, and then
smiled.

This was the thing poor blind Bles was trying to attack by "appeals" for
"justice." Nonsense! Does one "appeal" to the red-eyed beast that
throttles him? No. He composes himself, looks death in the eye, and
speaks softly, on the chance. Whereupon Miss Wynn composed herself,
waved gayly at a passing acquaintance, and matched some ribbons in a
department store. The clerk was new and anxious to sell.

Meantime her brain was busy. She had a hard task before her. Alwyn's
absurd conscience and Quixotic ideas were difficult to cope with. After
his last indiscreet talk she had ventured deftly to remonstrate, and she
well remembered the conversation.

"Wasn't what I said true?" he had asked.

"Perfectly. Is that an excuse for saying it?"

"The facts ought to be known."

"Yes, but ought you to tell them?"

"If not I, who?"

"Some one who is less useful elsewhere, and whom I like less."

"Carrie," he had been intensely earnest. "I want to do the best thing,
but I'm puzzled. I wonder if I'm selling my birthright for six thousand
dollars?"

"In case of doubt, do it."

"But there's the doubt: I may convert; I may open the eyes of the blind;
I may start a crusade for Negro rights."

"Don't believe it; it's useless; we'll never get our rights in this
land."

"You don't believe that!" he had ejaculated, shocked.

Well, she must begin again. As she had hoped, he was waiting for her
when she reached home. She welcomed him cordially, made a little music
for him, and served tea.

"Bles," she said, "the Opposition has been laying a pretty shrewd trap
for you."

"What?" he asked absently.

"They are going to have you chosen as High School commencement orator."

"Me? Stuff!"

"You--and not stuff, but 'Education' will be your natural theme. Indeed,
they have so engineered it that the party chiefs expect from you a
defence of their dropping of the Educational Bill."

"What!"

"Yes, and probably your nomination will come before the speech and
confirmation after."

Bles walked the floor excitedly for a while and then sat down and
smiled.

"It was a shrewd move," he said; "but I think I thank them for it."

"I don't. But still,

     _"''T is the sport to see the engineer hoist
     by his own petar.'"_

Bles mused and she watched him covertly. Suddenly she leaned over.

"Moreover," she said, "about that same date I'm liable to lose my
position as teacher."

He looked at her quickly, and she explained the coming revolution in
school management.

He did not discuss the matter, and she was equally reticent; but when he
entered the doors of his lodging-place and, gathering his mail, slowly
mounted the stairs, there came the battle of his life.

He knew it and he tried to wage it coolly and with method. He arrayed
the arguments side by side: on this side lay success; the greatest
office ever held by a Negro in America--greater than Douglass or Bruce
or Lynch had held--a landmark, a living example and inspiration. A man
owed the world success; there were plenty who could fail and stumble and
give multiple excuses. Should he be one? He viewed the other side. What
must he pay for success? Aye, face it boldly--what? Mechanically he
searched for his mail and undid the latest number of the _Colored
American_. He was sure the answer stood there in Teerswell's biting
vulgar English. And there it was, with a cartoon:

                HIS MASTER'S VOICE

     Alwyn is Ordered to Eat His Words or Get Out
            Watch Him Do It Gracefully
           The Republican Leaders, etc.

He threw down his paper, and the hot blood sang in his ears. The
sickening thought was that it was true. If he did make the speech
demanded it would be like a dog obedient to his master's voice.

The cold sweat oozed on his face; throwing up the window, he drank in
the Spring breeze, and stared at the city he once had thought so
alluring. Somehow it looked like the swamp, only less beautiful; he
stretched his arms and his lips breathed--"Zora!"

He turned hastily to his desk and looked at the other piece of mail--a
single sealed note carefully written on heavy paper. He did not
recognize the handwriting. Then his mind flew off again. What would they
say if he failed to get the office? How they would silently hoot and
jeer at the upstart who suddenly climbed so high and fell. And Carrie
Wynn--poor Carrie, with her pride and position dragged down in his ruin:
how would she take it? He writhed in soul. And yet, to be a man; to say
calmly, "No"; to stand in that great audience and say, "My people first
and last"; to take Carrie's hand and together face the world and
struggle again to newer finer triumphs--all this would be very close to
attainment of the ideal. He found himself staring at the little letter.
Would she go? Would she, could she, lay aside her pride and cynicism,
her dainty ways and little extravagances? An odd fancy came to him:
perhaps the answer to the riddle lay sealed within the envelope he
fingered.

He opened it. Within lay four lines of writing--no more--no address, no
signature; simply the words:

     _"It matters now how strait the gate,
       How charged with punishment the scroll;
     I am the master of my fate,
       I am the captain of my soul."_

He stared at the lines. Eleven o'clock--twelve--one--chimed the
deep-voiced clock without, before Alwyn went to bed.

Miss Wynn had kept a vigil almost as long. She knew that Bles had
influential friends who had urged his preferment; it might be wise to
enlist them. Before she fell asleep she had determined to have a talk
with Mrs. Vanderpool. She had learned from Senator Smith that the lady
took special interest in Alwyn.

Mrs. Vanderpool heard Miss Wynn's story next day with some inward
dismay. Really the breadth and depth of intrigue in this city almost
frightened her as she walked deeper into the mire. She had promised Zora
that Bles should receive his reward on terms which would not wound his
manhood. It seemed an easy, almost an obvious thing, to promise at the
time. Yet here was this rather unusual young woman asking Mrs.
Vanderpool to use her influence in making Alwyn bow to the yoke. She
fenced for time.

"But I do not know Mr. Alwyn."

"I thought you did; you recommended him highly."

"I knew of him slightly in the South and I have watched his career
here."

"It would be too bad to have that career spoiled now."

"But is it necessary? Suppose he should defend the Education Bill."

"And criticise the party?" asked Miss Wynn. "It would take strong
influence to pull him through."

"And if that strong influence were found?" said Mrs. Vanderpool
thoughtfully.

"It would surely involve some other important concession to the South."

Mrs. Vanderpool looked up, and an interjection hovered on her lips. Was
it possible that the price of Alwyn's manhood would be her husband's
appointment to Paris? And if it were?

"I'll do what I can," she said graciously; "but I am afraid that will
not be much."

Miss Wynn hesitated. She had not succeeded even in guessing the source
of Mrs. Vanderpool's interest in Alwyn, and without that her appeal was
but blind groping. She stopped on her way to the door to admire a bronze
statuette and find time to think.

"You are interested in bronzes?" asked Mrs. Vanderpool.

"Oh, no; I'm far too poor. But I've dabbled a bit in sculpture."

"Indeed?" Mrs. Vanderpool revealed a mild interest, and Miss Wynn was
compelled to depart with little enlightenment.

On the way up town she concluded that there was but one chance of
success: she must write Alwyn's speech. With characteristic decision she
began her plans at once.

"What will you say in your speech?" she asked him that night as he rose
to go.

He looked at her and she wavered slightly under his black eyes. The
fight was becoming a little too desperate even for her steady nerves.

"You would not like me to act dishonestly, would you?" he asked.

"No," she involuntarily replied, regretting the word the moment she had
uttered it. He gave her one of his rare sweet smiles, and, rising,
before she realized his intent, he had kissed her hands and was gone.

She asked herself why she had been so foolish; and yet, somehow, sitting
there alone in the firelight, she felt glad for once that she had risen
above intrigue. Then she sighed and smiled, and began to plot anew.
Teerswell dropped in later and brought his friend, Stillings. They found
their hostess gay and entertaining.

Miss Wynn gathered books about her, and in the days of April and May she
and Alwyn read up on education. He marvelled at the subtlety of her
mind, and she at the relentlessness of his. They were very near each
other during these days, and yet there was ever something between them:
a vision to him of dark and pleading eyes that he constantly saw beside
her cool, keen glance. And he to her was always two men: one man above
men, whom she could respect but would not marry, and one man like all
men, whom she would marry but could not respect. His devotion to an
ideal which she thought so utterly unpractical, aroused keen curiosity
and admiration. She was sure he would fail in the end, and she wanted
him to fail; and somehow, somewhere back beyond herself, her better self
longed to find herself defeated; to see this mind stand firm on
principle, under circumstances where she believed men never stood. Deep
within her she discovered at times a passionate longing to believe in
somebody; yet she found herself bending every energy to pull this man
down to the level of time-servers, and even as she failed, feeling
something like contempt for his stubbornness.

The great day came. He had her notes, her suggestions, her hints, but
she had no intimation of what he would finally say.

"Will you come to hear me?" he asked.

"No," she murmured.

"That is best," he said, and then he added slowly, "I would not like you
ever to despise me."

She answered sharply: "I want to despise you!"

Did he understand? She was not sure. She was sorry she had said it; but
she meant it fiercely. Then he left her, for it was already four in the
afternoon and he spoke at eight.

In the morning she came down early, despite some dawdling over her
toilet. She brought the morning paper into the dining-room and sat down
with it, sipping her coffee. She leaned back and looked leisurely at the
headings. There was nothing on the front page but a divorce, a
revolution, and a new Trust. She took another sip of her coffee, and
turned the page. There it was, "Colored High Schools Close--Vicious
Attack on Republican Party by Negro Orator."

She laid the paper aside and slowly finished her coffee. A few minutes
later she went to her desk and sat there so long that she started at
hearing the clock strike nine.

The day passed. When she came home from school she bought an evening
paper. She was not surprised to learn that the Senate had rejected
Alwyn's nomination; that Samuel Stillings had been nominated and
confirmed as Register of the Treasury, and that Mr. Tom Teerswell was to
be his assistant. Also the bill reorganizing the school board had
passed. She wrote two notes and posted them as she went out to walk.

When she reached home Stillings was there, and they talked earnestly.
The bell rang violently. Teerswell rushed in.

"Well, Carrie!" he cried eagerly.

"Well, Tom," she responded, giving him a languid hand. Stillings rose
and departed. Teerswell nodded and said:

"Well, what do you think of last night?"

"A great speech, I hear."

"A fool speech--that speech cost him, I calculate, between twenty-four
and forty-eight thousand dollars."

"Possibly he's satisfied with his bargain."

"Possibly. Are you?"

"With his bargain?" quickly. "Yes."

"No," he pressed her, "with your bargain?"

"What bargain?" she parried.

"To marry him."

"Oh, no; that's off."

"Is it off?" cried Teerswell delightedly. "Good! It was foolish from the
first--that black country--"

"Gently," Miss Wynn checked him. "I'm not yet over the habit."

"Come. See what I've bought. You know I have a salary now." He produced
a ring with a small diamond cluster.

"How pretty!" she said, taking it and looking at it. Then she handed it
back.

He laughed gayly. "It's yours, Carrie. You're going to marry me."

She looked at him queerly.

"Am I? But I've got another ring already," she said.

"Oh, send Alwyn's back."

"I have. This is still another." And uncovering her hand she showed a
ring with a large and beautiful diamond.

He rose. "Whose is that?" he demanded apprehensively.

"Mine--" her eyes met his.

"But who gave it to you?"

"Mr. Stillings," was the soft reply.

He stared at her helplessly. "I--I--don't understand!" he stammered.

"Well, to be brief, I'm engaged to Mr. Stillings."

"What! To that flat-headed--"

"No," she coolly interrupted, "to the Register of the Treasury."

The man was too dumbfounded, too overwhelmed for coherent speech.

"But--but--come; why in God's name--will you throw yourself away on--on
such a--you're joking--you--"

She motioned him to a chair. He obeyed like one in a trance.

"Now, Tom, be calm. When I was a baby I loved you, but that is long
ago. Today, Tom, you're an insufferable cad and I--well, I'm too much
like you to have two of us in the same family."

"But, Stillings!" he burst forth, almost in tears. "The snake--what is
he?"

"Nearly as bad as you, I'll admit; but he has four thousand a year and
sense enough to keep it. In truth, I need it; for, thanks to your
political activity, my own position is gone."

"But he's a--a damned rascal!" Wounded self-conceit was now getting the
upper hand.

She laughed.

"I think he is. But he's such an exceptional rascal; he appeals to me.
You know, Tom, we're all more or less rascally--except one."

"Except who?" he asked quickly.

"Bles Alwyn."

"The fool!"

"Yes," she slowly agreed. "Bles Alwyn, the Fool--and the Man. But by
grace of the Negro Problem, I cannot afford to marry a man--Hark! Some
one is on the steps. I'm sure it's Bles. You'd better go now. Don't
attempt to fight with him; he's very strong. Good-night."

Alwyn entered. He didn't notice Teerswell as he passed out. He went
straight to Miss Wynn holding a crumpled note, and his voice faltered a
little.

"Do you mean it?"

"Yes, Bles."

"Why?"

"Because I am selfish and--small."

"No, you are not. You want to be; but give it up, Carrie; it isn't worth
the cost. Come, let's be honest and poor--and free."

She regarded him a moment, searchingly, then a look half quizzical, half
sorrowful came into her eyes. She put both her hands on his shoulders
and said as she kissed his lips:

"Bles, almost thou persuadest me--to be a fool. Now go."




_Thirty_

THE RETURN OF ZORA


"I never realized before just what a lie meant," said Zora.

The paper in Mrs. Vanderpool's hands fell quickly to her lap, and she
gazed across the toilet-table.

As she gazed that odd mirage of other days haunted her again. She did
not seem to see her maid, nor the white and satin morning-room. She saw,
with some long inner sight, a vast hall with mighty pillars; a smooth,
marbled floor and a great throng whose silent eyes looked curiously upon
her. Strange carven beasts gazed on from a setting of rich, barbaric
splendor and she herself--the Liar--lay in rags before the gold and
ivory of that lofty throne whereon sat Zora.

The foolish phantasy passed with the second of time that brought it, and
Mrs. Vanderpool's eyes dropped again to her paper, to those lines,--

"The President has sent the following nominations to the Senate ... To
be ambassador to France, John Vanderpool, Esq."

The first feeling of triumph thrilled faintly again until the low voice
of Zora startled her. It was so low and calm, it came as though
journeying from great distances and weary with travel.

"I used to think a lie a little thing, a convenience; but now I see. It
is a great No and it kills things. You remember that day when Mr.
Easterly called?"

"Yes," replied Mrs. Vanderpool, faintly.

"I heard all he said. I could not help it; my transom was open. And
then, too, after he mentioned--Mr. Alwyn's name, I wanted to hear. I
knew that his appointment would cost you the embassy--unless Bles was
tempted and should fall. So I came to you to say--to say you mustn't pay
the price."

"And I lied," said Mrs. Vanderpool. "I told you that he should be
appointed and remain a man. I meant to make him see that he could yield
without great cost. But I let you think I was giving up the embassy when
I never intended to."

She spoke coldly, yet Zora knew. She reached out and took the white,
still hands in hers, and over the lady's face again flitted that
stricken look of age.

"I do not blame you," said Zora gently. "I blame the world."

"I am the world," Mrs. Vanderpool uttered harshly, then suddenly
laughed. But Zora went on:

"It bewildered me when I first read the news early this morning; the
world--everything--seemed wrong. You see, my plan was all so splendid.
Just as I turned away from him, back to my people, I was to help him to
the highest. I was so afraid he would miss it and think that Right
didn't win in Life, that I wrote him--"

"You wrote him? So did I."

Zora glanced at her quickly.

"Yes," said Mrs. Vanderpool. "I thought I knew him. He seemed an
ordinary, rather priggish, opinionated country boy, and I wrote and
said--Oh, I said that the world is the world; take it as it is. You
wrote differently, and he obeyed you."

"No; he did not know it was I. I was just a Voice from nowhere calling
to him. I thought I was right. I wrote each day, sometimes twice,
sending bits of verse, quotations, references, all saying the same
thing: Right always triumphs. But it doesn't, does it?"

"No. It never does save by accident."

"I do not think that is quite so," Zora pondered aloud, "and I am a
little puzzled. I do not belong in this world where Right and Wrong get
so mixed. With us yonder there is wrong, but we call it wrong--mostly.
Oh, I don't know; even there things are mixed." She looked sadly at Mrs.
Vanderpool, and the fear that had been hovering behind her mistress's
eyes became visible.

"It was so beautiful," said Zora. "I expected a great thing of you--a
sacrifice. I do not blame you because you could not do it; and yet--yet,
after this,--don't you see?--I cannot stay here."

Mrs. Vanderpool arose and walked over to her. She stood above her, in
her silken morning-gown, her brown and gray sprinkled hair rising above
the pale, strong-lined face.

"Zora," she faltered, "will you leave me?"

Zora answered, "Yes." It was a soft "yes," a "yes" full of pity and
regret, but a "yes" that Mrs. Vanderpool knew in her soul to be final.

She sat down again on the lounge and her fingers crept along the
cushions.

"Ambassadorships come--high," she said with a catch in her voice. Then
after a pause: "When will you go, Zora?"

"When you leave for the summer."

Mrs. Vanderpool looked out upon the beautiful city. She was a little
surprised at herself. She had found herself willing to sacrifice almost
anything for Zora. No living soul had ever raised in her so deep an
affection, and yet she knew now that, although the cost was great, she
was willing to sacrifice Zora for Paris. After all, it was not too
late; a rapid ride even now might secure high office for Alwyn and make
Cresswell ambassador. It would be difficult but possible. But she had
not the slightest inclination to attempt it, and she said aloud, half
mockingly:

"You are right, Zora. I promised--and--I lied. Liars have no place in
heaven and heaven is doubtless a beautiful place--but oh, Zora! you
haven't seen Paris!"

Two months later they parted simply, knowing well it was forever. Mrs.
Vanderpool wrote a check.

"Use this in your work," she said. "Miss Smith asked for it long ago. It
is--my campaign contribution."

Zora smiled and thanked her. As she put the sealed envelope in her trunk
her hand came in contact with a long untouched package. Zora took it out
silently and opened it and the beauty of it lightened the room.

"It is the Silver Fleece," said Zora, and Mrs. Vanderpool kissed her and
went.

Zora walked alone to the vaulted station. She did not try to buy a
Pullman ticket, although the journey was thirty-six hours. She knew it
would be difficult if not impossible and she preferred to share the lot
of her people. Once on the foremost car, she leaned back and looked. The
car seemed clean and comfortable but strangely short. Then she realized
that half of it was cut off for the white smokers and as the door swung
whiffs of the smoke came in. But she was content for she was almost
alone.

It was eighteen little months ago that she had ridden up to the world
with widening eyes. In that time what had happened? Everything. How well
she remembered her coming, the first reflection of yonder gilded dome
and the soaring of the capitol; the swelling of her heart, with
inarticulate wonder; the pain of the thirst to know and understand. She
did not know much now but she had learned how to find things out. She
did not understand all, but some things she--

"Ticket"--the tone was harsh and abrupt. Zora started. She had always
noted how polite conductors were to her and Mrs. Vanderpool--was it
simply because Mrs. Vanderpool was evidently a great and rich lady? She
held up her ticket and he snatched it from her muttering some direction.

"I beg your pardon?" she said.

"Change at Charlotte," he snapped as he went on.

It seemed to Zora that his discourtesy was almost forced: that he was
afraid he might be betrayed into some show of consideration for a black
woman. She felt no anger, she simply wondered what he feared. The
increasing smell of tobacco smoke started her coughing. She turned. To
be sure. Not only was the door to the smoker standing open, but a white
passenger was in her car, sitting by the conductor and puffing heartily.
As the black porter passed her she said gently:

"Is smoking allowed in here?"

"It ain't non o' my business," he flung back at her and moved away. All
day white men passed back and forward through the car as through a
thoroughfare. They talked loudly and laughed and joked, and if they did
not smoke they carried their lighted cigars. At her they stared and made
comments, and one of them came and lounged almost over her seat,
inquiring where she was going.

She did not reply; she neither looked nor stirred, but kept whispering
to herself with something like awe: "This is what they must endure--my
poor people!"

At Lynchburg a newsboy boarded the train with his wares. The conductor
had already appropriated two seats for himself, and the newsboy routed
out two colored passengers, and usurped two other seats. Then he began
to be especially annoying. He joked and wrestled with the porter, and on
every occasion pushed his wares at Zora, insisting on her buying.

"Ain't you got no money?" he asked. "Where you going?"

"Say," he whispered another time, "don't you want to buy these gold
spectacles? I found 'em and I dassen't sell 'em open, see? They're
worth ten dollars--take 'em for a dollar."

Zora sat still, keeping her eyes on the window; but her hands worked
nervously, and when he threw a book with a picture of a man and
half-dressed woman directly under her eyes, she took it and dropped it
out the window.

The boy started to storm and demanded pay, while the conductor glared at
her; but a white man in the conductor's seat whispered something, and
the row suddenly stopped.

A gang of colored section hands got on, dirty and loud. They sprawled
about and smoked, drank, and bought candy and cheap gewgaws. They eyed
her respectfully, and with one of them she talked a little as he
awkwardly fingered his cap.

As the day wore on Zora found herself strangely weary. It was not simply
the unpleasant things that kept happening, but the continued
apprehension of unknown possibilities. Then, too, she began to realize
that she had had nothing to eat. Travelling with Mrs. Vanderpool there
was always a dainty lunch to be had at call. She did not expect this,
but she asked the porter:

"Do you know where I can get a lunch?"

"Search me," he answered, lounging into a seat. "Ain't no chance betwixt
here and Danville as I knows on."

Zora viewed her plight with a certain dismay--twelve hours without food!
How foolish of her not to have thought of this. The hours passed. She
turned desperately to the gruff conductor.

"Could I buy a lunch from the dining-car?" she inquired.

"No," was the curt reply.

She made herself as comfortable as she could, and tried to put the
matter from her mind. She remembered how, forgotten years ago, she had
often gone a day without eating and thought little of it. Night came
slowly, and she fell to dreaming until the cry came, "Charlotte! Change
cars!" She scrambled out. There was no step to the platform, her bag
was heavy, and the porter was busy helping the white folks to alight.
She saw a dingy lunchroom marked "Colored," but she had no time to go to
it for her train was ready.

There was another colored porter on this, and he was very polite and
affable.

"Yes, Miss; certainly I'll fetch you a lunch--plenty of time." And he
did. It did not look clean but Zora was ravenous.

The white smoker now had few occupants, but the white train crew
proceeded to use the colored coach as a lounging-room and sleeping-car.
There was no passenger except Zora. They took off their coats, stretched
themselves on the seats, and exchanged jokes; but Zora was too tired to
notice much, and she was dozing wearily when she felt a touch on the arm
and found the porter in the seat beside her with his arm thrown
familiarly behind her along the top of the back. She rose abruptly to
her feet and he started up.

"I beg pardon," he said, grinning.

Zora sat slowly down as he got up and left. She determined to sleep no
more. Yet a vast vision sank on her weary spirit--the vision of a dark
cloud that dropped and dropped upon her, and lay as lead along her
straining shoulders. She must lift it, she knew, though it were big as a
world, and she put her strength to it and groaned as the porter cried in
the ghostly morning light:

"Atlanta! All change!"

Away yonder at the school near Toomsville, Miss Smith sat waiting for
the coming of Zora, absently attending the duties of the office. Dark
little heads and hands bobbed by and soft voices called:

"Miss Smith, I wants a penny pencil."

"Miss Smith, is yo' got a speller fo' ten cents?"

"Miss Smith, mammy say please lemme come to school this week and she'll
sho' pay Sata'day."

Yet the little voices that summoned her back to earth were less
clamorous than in other years, for the school was far from full, and
Miss Smith observed the falling off with grave eyes. This condition was
patently the result of the cotton corner and the subsequent
manipulation. When cotton rose, the tenants had already sold their
cotton; when cotton fell the landlords squeezed the rations and lowered
the wages. When cotton rose again, up went the new Spring rent
contracts. So it was that the bewildered black serf dawdled in listless
inability to understand. The Cresswells in their new wealth, the
Maxwells and Tollivers in the new pinch of poverty, stretched long arms
to gather in the tenants and their children. Excuse after excuse came to
the school.

"I can't send the chilluns dis term, Miss Smith; dey has to work."

"Mr. Cresswell won't allow Will to go to school this term."

"Mr. Tolliver done put Sam in the field."

And so Miss Smith contemplated many empty desks.

Slowly a sort of fatal inaction seized her. The school went on; daily
the dark little cloud of scholars rose up from hill and vale and settled
in the white buildings; the hum of voices and the busy movements of
industrious teachers filled the day; the office work went on
methodically; but back of it all Miss Smith sat half hopeless. It cost
five thousand a year to run the school, and this sum she raised with
increasingly greater difficulty. Extra and heart-straining effort had
been needed to raise the eight hundred dollars additional for interest
money on the mortgage last year. Next year it might have to come out of
the regular income and thus cut off two teachers. Beyond all this the
raising of ten thousand dollars to satisfy the mortgage seemed simply
impossible, and Miss Smith sat in fatal resignation, awaiting the coming
day.

"It's the Lord's work. I've done what I could. I guess if He wants it to
go on, He'll find a way. And if He doesn't--" She looked off across the
swamp and was silent.

Then came Zora's letter, simple and brief, but breathing youth and
strength of purpose. Miss Smith seized upon it as an omen of salvation.
In vain her shrewd New England reason asked: "What can a half-taught
black girl do in this wilderness?" Her heart answered back: "What is
impossible to youth and resolution?" Let the shabbiness increase; let
the debts pile up; let the boarders complain and the teachers
gossip--Zora was coming. And somehow she and Zora would find a way.

And Zora came just as the sun threw its last crimson through the black
swamp; came and gathered the frail and white-haired woman in her arms;
and they wept together. Long and low they talked, far into the soft
Southern night; sitting shaded beneath the stars, while nearby blinked
the drowsy lights of the girls' dormitory. At last Miss Smith said,
rising stiffly:

"I forgot to ask about Mrs. Vanderpool. How is she, and where?"

Zora murmured some answer; but as she went to bed in her little white
room she sat wondering sadly. Where was the poor spoiled woman? Who was
putting her to bed and smoothing the pillow? Who was caring for her, and
what was she doing? And Zora strained her eyes Northward through the
night.

At this moment, Mrs. Vanderpool, rising from a gala dinner in the
brilliant drawing-room of her Lake George mansion, was reading the
evening paper which her husband had put into her hands. With startled
eyes she caught the impudent headlines:

              VANDERPOOL DROPPED

          Senate Refuses to Confirm

 Todd Insurgents Muster Enough Votes to Defeat

      Confirmation of President's Nominee

Rumored Revenge for Machine's Defeat of Child Labor

               Bill Amendment.


The paper trembled in her jewelled hands. She glanced down the column.

"Todd asks: Who is Vanderpool, anyhow? What did he ever do? He is known
only as a selfish millionaire who thinks more of horses than of men."

Carelessly Mrs. Vanderpool threw the paper to the floor and bit her lips
as the angry blood dyed her face.

"They _shall_ confirm him," she whispered, "if I have to mortgage my
immortal soul!" And she rang up long distance on the telephone.




_Thirty-one_

A PARTING OF WAYS


"Was the child born dead?"

"Worse than dead!"

Somehow, somewhere, Mary Cresswell had heard these words; long, long,
ago, down there in the great pain-swept shadows of utter agony, where
Earth seemed slipping its moorings; and now, today, she lay repeating
them mechanically, grasping vaguely at their meaning. Long she had
wrestled with them as they twisted and turned and knotted themselves,
and she worked and toiled so hard as she lay there to make the thing
clear--to understand.

"Was the child born dead?"

"Worse than dead!"

Then faint and fainter whisperings: what could be worse than death? She
had tried to ask the grey old doctor, but he soothed her like a child
each day and left her lying there. Today she was stronger, and for the
first time sitting up, looking listlessly out across the world--a queer
world. Why had they not let her see the child--just one look at its
little dead face? That would have been something. And again, as the
doctor cheerily turned to go, she sought to repeat the old question. He
looked at her sharply, then interrupted, saying kindly:

"There, now; you've been dreaming. You must rest quietly now." And with
a nod he passed into the other room to talk with her husband.

She was not satisfied. She had not been dreaming. She would tell Harry
to ask him--she did not often see her husband, but she must ask him now
and she arose unsteadily and swayed noiselessly across the floor. A
moment she leaned against the door, then opened it slightly. From the
other side the words came distinctly and clearly:

"--other children, doctor?"

"You must have no other children, Mr. Cresswell."

"Why?"

"Because the sins of the fathers are visited upon the children unto the
third and fourth generation."

Slowly, softly, she crept away. Her mind seemed very clear. And she
began a long journey to reach her window and chair--a long, long
journey; but at last she sank into the chair again and sat dry-eyed,
wondering who had conceived this world and made it, and why.

A long time afterward she found herself lying in bed, awake, conscious,
clear-minded. Yet she thought as little as possible, for that was pain;
but she listened gladly, for without she heard the solemn beating of the
sea, the mighty rhythmic beating of the sea. Long days she lay, and sat
and walked beside those vast and speaking waters, till at last she knew
their voice and they spoke to her and the sea-calm soothed her soul.

For one brief moment of her life she saw herself clearly: a well-meaning
woman, ambitious, but curiously narrow; not willing to work long for
the Vision, but leaping at it rashly, blindly, with a deep-seated sense
of duty which she made a source of offence by preening and parading it,
and forcing it to ill-timed notice. She saw that she had looked on her
husband as a means not an end. She had wished to absorb him and his work
for her own glory. She had idealized for her own uses a very human man
whose life had been full of sin and fault. She must atone.

No sooner, in this brief moment, did she see herself honestly than her
old habits swept her on tumultuously. No ordinary atonement would do.
The sacrifice must be vast; the world must stand in wonder before this
clever woman sinking her soul in another and raising him by sheer will
to the highest.

So after six endless months Mary Cresswell walked into her Washington
home again. She knew she had changed in appearance, but she had
forgotten to note how much until she saw the stare--almost the
recoil--of her husband, the muttered exclamation, the studied, almost
overdone welcome. Then she went up to her mirror and looked long, and
knew.

She was strong; she felt well; but she was slight, almost scrawny, and
her beauty was gone forever. It had been of that blonde white-and-pink
type that fades in a flash, and its going left her body flattened and
angular, her skin drawn and dead white, her eyes sunken. From the
radiant girl whom Cresswell had met three years earlier the change was
startling, and yet the contrast seemed even greater than it was, for her
glory then had been her abundant and almost golden hair. Now that hair
was faded, and falling so fast that at last the doctor advised her to
cut it short. This left her ill-shaped head exposed and emphasized the
sunken hollows of her face. She knew that she was changed but she did
not quite realize how changed, until now as she stood and gazed.

Yet she did not hesitate but from that moment set herself to her new
life task. Characteristically, she started dramatically and largely. She
was to make her life an endless sacrifice; she was to revivify the
manhood in Harry Cresswell, and all this for no return, no partnership
of soul--all was to be complete sacrifice and sinking soul in soul.

If Mary Cresswell had attempted less she would have accomplished more.
As it was, she began well; she went to work tactfully, seeming to note
no change in his manner toward her; but his manner had changed. He was
studiously, scrupulously polite in private, and in public devoted; but
there was no feeling, no passion, no love. The polished shell of his
clan reflected conventional light even more carefully than formerly
because the shell was cold and empty. There were no little flashes of
anger now, no poutings nor sweet reconciliations. Life ran very smoothly
and courteously; and while she did not try to regain the affection, she
strove to enthrall his intellect. She supplied a sub-committee upon
which he was serving--not directly, but through him--with figures, with
reports, books, and papers, so that he received special commendations; a
praise that piqued as well as pleased him, because it implied a certain
surprise that he was able to do it.

"The damned Yankees!" he sneered. "They think they've got the brains of
the nation."

"Why not make a speech on the subject?" she suggested.

He laughed. The matter under discussion was the cotton-goods schedule of
the new tariff bill, about which really he knew a little; his wife
placed every temptation to knowledge before him, even inspiring Senator
Smith to ask him to defend that schedule against the low-tariff
advocate. Mary Cresswell worked with redoubled energy, and for nearly a
week Harry staid at home nights and studied. Thanks to his wife the
speech was unusually informing and well put, and the fact that a
prominent free-trader spoke the same afternoon gave it publicity, while
Mr. Easterly saw to the press despatches.

Cresswell subscribed to a clipping-bureau and tasted the sweets of
dawning notoriety, and Mrs. Cresswell arranged a select dinner-party
which included a cabinet officer, a foreign ambassador, two
millionaires, and the leading Southern Congressmen. The talk came
around to the failure of the Senate to confirm Mr. Vanderpool, and it
was generally assumed that the President would not force the issue.

Who, then, should be nominated? There were several suggestions, but the
knot of Southern Congressmen about Mrs. Cresswell declared emphatically
that it must be a Southerner. Not since the war had a prominent
Southerner represented America at a first-class foreign court; it was
shameful; the time was ripe for change. But who? Here opinions differed
widely. Nearly every one mentioned a candidate, and those who did not
seemed to refrain from motives of personal modesty.

Mary Cresswell sped her departing guests with a distinct purpose in
mind. She must make herself leader of the Southern set in Washington and
concentrate its whole force on the appointment of Harry Cresswell as
ambassador to France. Quick reward and promotion were essential to
Harry's success. He was not one to keep up the strain of effort a long
time. Unless, then, tangible results came and came quickly, he was
liable to relapse into old habits. Therefore he must succeed and succeed
at once. She would have preferred a less ornamental position than the
ambassadorship, but there were no other openings. The Alabama senators
were firmly seated for at least four years and the Governorship had been
carefully arranged for. A term of four years abroad, however, might
bring Harry Cresswell back in time for greater advancement. At any rate,
it was the only tangible offering, and Mary Cresswell silently
determined to work for it.

Here it was that she made her mistake. It was one thing for her to be a
tactful hostess, pleasing her husband and his guests; it was another for
her to aim openly at social leadership and political influence. She had
at first all the insignia of success. Her dinners became of real
political significance and her husband figured more and more as a
leading Southerner. The result was two-fold. Cresswell, on the one hand,
with his usual selfishness, took his rising popularity as a matter of
course and as the fruits of his own work; he was rising, he was making
valuable speeches, he was becoming a social power, and his only handicap
was his plain and over-ambitious wife. But on the other hand Mrs.
Cresswell forgot two pitfalls: the cleft between the old Southern
aristocracy and the pushing new Southerners; and above all, her own
Northern birth and presumably pro-Negro sympathies.

What Mrs. Cresswell forgot Mrs. Vanderpool sensed unerringly. She had
heard with uneasiness of Cresswell's renewed candidacy for the Paris
ambassadorship, and she set herself to block it. She had worked hard.
The President stood ready to send her husband's appointment again to the
Senate whenever Easterly could assure him of favorable action. Easterly
had long and satisfactory interviews with several senators, while the
Todd insurgents were losing heart at the prospect of choosing between
Vanderpool and Cresswell. At present four Southern votes were needed to
confirm Vanderpool; but if they could not be had, Easterly declared it
would be good politics to nominate Cresswell and give him Republican
support. Manifestly, then, Mrs. Vanderpool's task was to discredit the
Cresswells with the Southerners. It was not a work to her liking, but
the die was cast and she refused to contemplate defeat.

The result was that while Mrs. Cresswell was giving large and brilliant
parties to the whole Southern contingent, Mrs. Vanderpool was
engineering exclusive dinners where old New York met stately Charleston
and gossiped interestingly. On such occasions it was hinted not once,
but many times, that the Cresswells were well enough, but who was that
upstart wife who presumed to take social precedence?

It was not, however, until Mrs. Cresswell's plan for an all-Southern art
exhibit in Washington that Mrs. Vanderpool, in a flash of inspiration,
saw her chance. In the annual exhibit of the Corcoran Art Gallery, a
Southern girl had nearly won first prize over a Western man. The
concensus of Southern opinion was that the judgment had been unfair, and
Mrs. Cresswell was convinced of this. With quick intuition she
suggested a Southern exhibit with such social prestige back of it as to
impress the country.

The proposal caught the imagination of the Southern set. None suspected
a possible intrusion of the eternal race issue for no Negroes were
allowed in the Corcoran exhibit or school. This Mrs. Vanderpool easily
ascertained and a certain sense of justice combined in a curious way
with her political intrigue to bring about the undoing of Mary
Cresswell.

Mrs. Vanderpool's very first cautious inquiries by way of the back
stairs brought gratifying response--for did not all black Washington
know well of the work in sculpture done by Mrs. Samuel Stillings, _nee_
Wynn? Mrs. Vanderpool remembered Mrs. Stillings perfectly, and she
walked, that evening, through unobtrusive thoroughfares and called on
Mrs. Stillings. Had Mrs. Stillings heard of the new art movement? Did
she intend to exhibit? Mrs. Stillings did not intend to exhibit as she
was sure she would not be welcome. She had had a bust accepted by the
Corcoran Art Gallery once, and when they found she was colored they
returned it. But if she were especially invited? That would make a
difference, although even then the line would be drawn somehow.

"Would it not be worth a fight?" suggested Mrs. Vanderpool with a little
heightening of color in her pale cheek.

"Perhaps," said Mrs. Stillings, as she brought out some specimens of her
work.

Mrs. Vanderpool was both ashamed and grateful. With money and leisure
Mrs. Stillings had been able to get in New York and Boston the training
she had been denied in Washington on account of her color. The things
she exhibited really had merit and one curiously original group appealed
to Mrs. Vanderpool tremendously.

"Send it," she counseled with strangely contradictory feelings of
enthusiasm, and added: "Enter it under the name of Wynn."

In addition to the general invitations to the art exhibit numbers of
special ones were issued to promising Southern amateurs who had never
exhibited. For these a prize of a long-term scholarship and other
smaller prizes were offered. When Mrs. Vanderpool suggested the name of
"Miss Wynn" to Mrs. Cresswell among a dozen others, for special
invitation, there was nothing in its sound to distinguish it from the
rest of the names, and the invitation went duly. As a result there came
to the exhibit a little group called "The Outcasts," which was really a
masterly thing and sent the director, Signor Alberni, into hysterical
commendation.

In the private view and award of prizes which preceded the larger social
function the jury hesitated long between "The Outcasts" and a painting
from Georgia. Mrs. Cresswell was enthusiastic and voluble for the bit of
sculpture, and it finally won the vote for the first prize.

All was ready for the great day. The President was coming and most of
the diplomatic corps, high officers of the army, and all the social
leaders. Congress would be well represented, and the boom for Cresswell
as ambassador to France was almost visible in the air.

Mary Cresswell paused a moment in triumph looking back at the darkened
hall, when a little woman fluttered up to her and whispered:

"Mrs. Cresswell, have you heard the gossip?"

"No--what?"

"That Wynn woman they say is a nigger. Some are whispering that you
brought her in purposely to force social equality. They say you used to
teach darkies. Of course, I don't believe all their talk, but I thought
you ought to know." She talked a while longer, then fluttered furtively
away.

Mrs. Cresswell sat down limply. She saw ruin ahead--to think of a black
girl taking a prize at an all-Southern art exhibit! But there was still
a chance, and she leaped to action. This colored woman was doubtless
some poor deserving creature. She would call on her immediately, and by
an offer of abundant help induce her to withdraw quietly.

Entering her motor, she drove near the address and then proceeded on
foot. The street was a prominent one, the block one of the best, the
house almost pretentious. She glanced at her memorandum again to see if
she was mistaken. Perhaps the woman was a domestic; probably she was,
for the name on the door was Stillings. It occurred to her that she had
heard that name before--but where? She looked again at her memorandum
and at the house.

She rang the bell, asking the trim black maid: "Is there a person named
Caroline Wynn living in this house?"

The girl smiled and hesitated.

"Yes, ma'am," she finally replied. "Won't you come in?" She was shown
into the parlor, where she sat down. The room was most interesting,
furnished in unimpeachable taste. A few good pictures were on the walls,
and Mrs. Cresswell was examining one when she heard the swish of silken
skirts. A lady with gold brown face and straight hair stood before her
with pleasant smile. Where had Mrs. Cresswell seen her before? She tried
to remember, but could not.

"You wished to see--Caroline Wynn?"

"Yes."

"What can I do for you?"

Mrs. Cresswell groped for her proper cue, but the brown lady merely
offered a chair and sat down silently. Mrs. Cresswell's perplexity
increased. She had been planning to descend graciously but
authoritatively upon some shrinking girl, but this woman not only seemed
to assume equality but actually looked it. From a rapid survey, Mrs.
Cresswell saw a black silk stocking, a bit of lace, a tailor-made gown,
and a head with two full black eyes that waited in calmly polite
expectancy.

Something had to be said.

"I--er--came; that is, I believe you sent a group to the art exhibit?"

"Yes."

"It was good--very good."

Miss Wynn said nothing, but sat calmly looking at her visitor. Mrs.
Cresswell felt irritated.

"Of course," she managed to continue, "we are very sorry that we cannot
receive it."

"Indeed? I understood it had taken the first prize."

Mrs. Cresswell was aghast. Who had rushed the news to this woman? She
realized that there were depths to this matter that she did not
understand and her irritation increased.

"You know that we could not give the prize to a--Negro."

"Why not?"

"That is quite immaterial. Social equality cannot be forced. At the same
time I recognize the injustice, and I have come to say that if you will
withdraw your exhibit you will be given a scholarship in a Boston
school."

"I do not wish it."

"Well, what do you want?"

"I was not aware that I had asked for anything."

Mrs. Cresswell felt herself getting angry.

"Why did you send your exhibit when you knew it was not wanted?"

"Because you asked me to."

"We did not ask for colored people."

"You asked all Southern-born persons. I am a person and I am Southern
born. Moreover, you sent me a personal letter."

Mrs. Cresswell was sure that this was a lie and was thoroughly incensed.

"You cannot have the prize," she almost snapped. "If you will withdraw I
will pay you any reasonable sum."

"Thank you. I do not want money; I want justice."

Mrs. Cresswell arose and her face was white.

"That is the trouble with you Negroes: you wish to get above your places
and force yourselves where you are not wanted. It does no good, it only
makes trouble and enemies." Mrs. Cresswell stopped, for the colored
woman had gone quietly out of the room and in a moment the maid entered
and stood ready. Mrs. Cresswell walked slowly to the door and stepped
out. Then she turned.

"What does Miss Wynn do for a living?"

The girl tittered.

"She used to teach school but she don't do nothing now. She's just
married; her husband is Mr. Stillings, Register of the Treasury."

Mrs. Cresswell saw light as she turned to go down the steps. There was
but one resource--she must keep the matter out of the newspapers, and
see Stillings, whom she now remembered well.

"I beg pardon, does the Miss Wynn live here who got the prize in the art
exhibition?"

Mrs. Cresswell turned in amazement. It was evidently a reporter, and the
maid was admitting him. The news would reach the papers and be blazoned
to-morrow. Slowly she caught her motor and fell wearily back on its
cushions.

"Where to, Madame?" asked the chauffeur.

"I don't care," returned Madame; so the chauffeur took her home.

She walked slowly up the stairs. All her carefully laid plans seemed
about to be thwarted and her castles were leaning toward ruin.

Yet all was not lost, if her husband continued to believe in her. If, as
she feared, he should suspect her on account of this Negro woman, and
quarrel with her--

But he must not. This very night, before the morning papers came out,
she must explain. He must see; he must appreciate her efforts.

She rushed into her dressing-room and called her maid. Contrary to her
Puritan notions, she frankly sought to beautify herself. She remembered
that it was the anniversary of her coming to this house. She got out her
wedding-dress, and although it hung loosely, the maid draped the Silver
Fleece beautifully about her.

She heard her husband enter and come up-stairs. Quickly finishing her
toilet, she hurried down to arrange the flowers, for they were alone
that night. The telephone rang. She knew it would ring up-stairs in his
room, but she usually answered it for he disliked to. She raised the
receiver and started to speak when she realized that she had broken into
the midst of a conversation.

"--committee won't meet tonight, Harry."

"So? All right. Anything on?"

"Yes--big spree at Nell's. Will you go?"

"Sure thing; you know me! What time?"

"Meet us at the Willard by nine. S'long."

"Good-bye."

She slowly, half guiltily, replaced the receiver. She had not meant to
listen, but now to her desperate longing to keep him home was added a
new motive. Where was "Nell's"? What was "Nell's"? What was--and there
was fear in her heart. At dinner she tried all her powers on him. She
had his favorite dishes; she mixed his salad and selected his wine; she
talked interestingly, and listened sympathetically, to him. He looked at
her with more attention. Her cheeks were more brilliant, for she had
touched them with rouge. Her eyes flashed; but he glanced furtively at
her short hair. She saw the act; but still she strove until he was
content and laughing; then coming round back of his chair, she placed
her arms about his neck.

"Harry, will you do me a favor?"

"Why, yes--if--"

"It is something I want very, very much."

"Well, all right, if--"

"Harry, I feel a little--hysterical, tonight, and--you will not refuse
me, will you, Harry?"

Standing there, she saw the tableau in her own mind, and it looked
strange. She was afraid of herself. She knew that she would do something
foolish if she did not win this battle. She felt that overpowering
fanaticism back within her raging restlessly. If she was not careful--

"But what is it you want?" asked her husband.

"I don't want you to go out tonight."

He laughed awkwardly.

"Nonsense, girl! The sub-committee on the cotton schedule meets
tonight--very important; otherwise--"

She shuddered at the smooth lie and clasped him closer, putting her
cheek to his.

"Harry," she pleaded, "just this once--for me."

He disengaged himself, half impatiently, and rose, glancing at the
clock. It was nearly nine. A feeling of desperation came over her.

"Harry," she asked again as he slipped on his coat.

"Don't be foolish," he growled.

"Just this once--Harry--I--" But the door banged to, and he was gone.

She stood looking at the closed door a moment. Something in her head was
ready to snap. She went to the rack and taking his long heavy overcoat
slipped it on. It nearly touched the floor. She seized a soft
broad-brimmed hat and umbrella and walked out. Just what she meant to do
she did not know, but somehow she must save her husband and herself from
evil. She hurried to the Willard Hotel and watched, walking up and down
the opposite sidewalk. A woman brushed by her and looked her in the
face.

"Hell! I thought you was a man," she said. "Is this a new gag?"

Mrs. Cresswell looked down at herself involuntarily and smiled wanly.
She did look like a man, with her hat and coat and short hair. The woman
peered at her doubtingly. She was, as Mrs. Cresswell noticed, a young
woman, once pretty, perhaps, and a little over-dressed.

"Are you walking?" she asked.

"What do you mean?" asked Mrs. Cresswell, and then in a moment it
flashed upon her. She took the woman's arm and walked with her. Suddenly
she stopped.

"Where's--Nell's?"

The woman frowned. "Oh, that's a swell place," she said. "Senators and
millionaires. Too high for us to fly."

Mrs. Cresswell winced. "But where is it?" she asked.

"We'll walk by it if you want to."

And Mary Cresswell walked in another world. Up from the ground of the
drowsy city rose pale gray forms; pale, flushed, and brilliant, in
silken rags. Up and down they passed, to and fro, looking and gliding
like sheeted ghosts; now dodging policemen, now accosting them
familiarly.

"Hello, Elise," growled one big blue-coat.

"Hello, Jack."

"What's this?" and he peered at Mrs. Cresswell, who shrank back.

"Friend of mine. All right."

A horror crept over Mary Cresswell: where had she lived that she had
seen so little before? What was Washington, and what was this fine,
tall, quiet residence? Was this--"Nell's"?

"Yes, this is it--good-bye--I must--"

"Wait--what is your name?"

"I haven't any name," answered the woman suspiciously.

"Well--pardon me! Here!" and she thrust a bill into the woman's hand.

The girl stared. "Well, you're a queer one! Thanks. Guess I'll turn in."

Mary Cresswell turned to see her husband and his companions ascending
the steps of the quiet mansion. She stood uncertainly and looked at the
opening and closing door. Then a policeman came by and looked at her.

"Come, move on," he brusquely ordered. Her vacillation promptly
vanished, and she resolutely mounted the steps. She put out her hand to
ring, but the door flew silently open and a man-servant stood looking at
her.

"I have some friends here," she said, speaking coarsely.

"You will have to be introduced," said the man. She hesitated and
started to turn away. Thrusting her hand in her pocket it closed upon
her husband's card-case. She presented a card. It worked a rapid
transformation in the servant's manner, which did not escape her.

"Come in," he invited her.

She did not stop at the outstretched arm of the cloakman, but glided
quickly up the stairs toward a vision of handsome women and strains of
music. Harry Cresswell was sitting opposite and bending over an impudent
blue-and-blonde beauty. Mary slipped straight across to him and leaned
across the table. The hat fell off, but she let it go.

"Harry!" she tried to say as he looked up.

Then the table swayed gently to and fro; the room bowed and whirled
about; the voices grew fainter and fainter--all the world receded
suddenly far away. She extended her hands languidly, then, feeling so
utterly tired, let her eyelids drop and fell asleep.

She awoke with a start, in her own bed. She was physically exhausted but
her mind was clear. She must go down and meet him at breakfast and talk
frankly with him. She would let bygones be bygones. She would explain
that she had followed him to save him, not to betray him. She would
point out the greater career before him if only he would be a man; she
would show him that they had not failed. For herself she asked nothing,
only his word, his confidence, his promise to try.

After his first start of surprise at seeing her at the table, Cresswell
uttered nothing immediately save the commonplaces of greeting. He
mentioned one or two bits of news from the paper, upon which she
commented while dawdling over her egg. When the servant went out and
closed the door, she paused a moment considering whether to open by
appeal or explanation. His smooth tones startled her:

"Of course, after your art exhibit and the scene of last night, Mary, it
will be impossible for us to live longer together."

She stared at him, utterly aghast--voiceless and numb.

"I have seen the crisis approaching for some time, and the Negro
business settles it," he continued. "I have now decided to send you to
my home in Alabama, to my father or your brother. I am sure you will be
happier there."

He rose. Bowing courteously, he waited, coldly and calmly, for her to
go.

All at once she hated him and hated his aristocratic repression; this
cold calm that hid hell and its fires. She looked at him, wide-eyed, and
said in a voice hoarse with horror and loathing:

"You brute! You nasty brute!"




_Thirty-two_

ZORA'S WAY


Zora was looking on her world with the keener vision of one who, blind
from very seeing, closes the eyes a space and looks again with wider
clearer vision. Out of a nebulous cloudland she seemed to step; a land
where all things floated in strange confusion, but where one thing stood
steadfast, and that was love. When love was shaken all things moved, but
now, at last, for the first time she seemed to know the real and mighty
world that stood behind that old and shaken dream.

So she looked on the world about her with new eyes. These men and women
of her childhood had hitherto walked by her like shadows; today they
lived for her in flesh and blood. She saw hundreds and thousands of
black men and women: crushed, half-spirited, and blind. She saw how high
and clear a light Sarah Smith, for thirty years and more, had carried
before them. She saw, too, how that the light had not simply shone in
darkness, but had lighted answering beacons here and there in these dull
souls.

There were thoughts and vague stirrings of unrest in this mass of black
folk. They talked long about their firesides, and here Zora began to sit
and listen, often speaking a word herself. All through the countryside
she flitted, till gradually the black folk came to know her and, in
silent deference to some subtle difference, they gave her the title of
white folk, calling her "Miss" Zora.

Today, more than ever before, Zora sensed the vast unorganized power in
this mass, and her mind was leaping here and there, scheming and
testing, when voices arrested her.

It was a desolate bit of the Cresswell manor, a tiny cabin, new-boarded
and bare, in front of it a blazing bonfire. A white man was tossing into
the flames different household articles--a feather bed, a bedstead, two
rickety chairs. A young, boyish fellow, golden-faced and curly, stood
with clenched fists, while a woman with tear-stained eyes clung to him.
The white man raised a cradle to dash it into the flames; the woman
cried, and the yellow man raised his arm threateningly. But Zora's hand
was on his shoulder.

"What's the matter, Rob?" she asked.

"They're selling us out," he muttered savagely. "Millie's been sick
since the last baby died, and I had to neglect my crop to tend her and
the other little ones--I didn't make much. They've took my mule, now
they're burning my things to make me sign a contract and be a slave. But
by--"

"There, Rob, let Millie come with me--we'll see Miss Smith. We must get
land to rent and arrange somehow."

The mother sobbed, "The cradle--was baby's!"

With an oath the white man dashed the cradle into the fire, and the red
flame spurted aloft.

The crimson fire flashed in Zora's eyes as she passed the overseer.

"Well, nigger, what are you going to do about it?" he growled
insolently.

Zora's eyelids drooped, her upper lip quivered.

"Nothing," she answered softly. "But I hope your soul will burn in hell
forever and forever."

They proceeded down the plantation road, but Zora could not speak. She
pushed them slowly on, and turned aside to let the anger, the impotent,
futile anger, rage itself out. Alone in the great broad spaces, she knew
she could fight it down, and come back again, cool and in calm and
deadly earnest, to lead these children to the light.

The sorrow in her heart was new and strange; not sorrow for herself, for
of that she had tasted the uttermost; but the vast vicarious suffering
for the evil of the world. The tumult and war within her fled, and a
sense of helplessness sent the hot tears streaming down her cheeks. She
longed for rest; but the last plantation was yet to be passed. Far off
she heard the yodle of the gangs of peons. She hesitated, looking for
some way of escape: if she passed them she would see something--she
always saw something--that would send the red blood whirling madly.

"Here, you!--loafing again, damn you!" She saw the black whip writhe and
curl across the shoulders of the plough-boy. The boy crouched and
snarled, and again the whip hissed and cracked.

Zora stood rigid and gray.

"My God!" her silent soul was shrieking within, "why doesn't the
coward--"

And then the "coward" did. The whip was whirring in the air again; but
it never fell. A jagged stone in the boy's hand struck true, and the
overseer plunged with a grunt into the black furrow. In blank dismay,
Zora came back to her senses.

"Poor child!" she gasped, as she saw the boy flying in wild terror over
the fields, with hue and cry behind him.

"Poor child!--running to the penitentiary--to shame and hunger and
damnation!"

She remembered the rector in Mrs. Vanderpool's library, and his
question that revealed unfathomable depths of ignorance: "Really, now,
how do you account for the distressing increase in crime among your
people?"

She swung into the great road trembling with the woe of the world in her
eyes. Cruelty, poverty, and crime she had looked in the face that
morning, and the hurt of it held her heart pinched and quivering. A
moment the mists in her eyes shut out the shadows of the swamp, and the
roaring in her ears made a silence of the world.

Before she found herself again she dimly saw a couple sauntering along
the road, but she hardly noticed their white faces until the little
voice of the girl, raised timidly, greeted her.

"Howdy, Zora."

Zora looked. The girl was Emma, and beside her, smiling, stood a
half-grown white man. It was Emma, Bertie's child; and yet it was not,
for in the child of other days Zora saw for the first time the dawning
woman.

And she saw, too, the white man. Suddenly the horror of the swamp was
upon her. She swept between the couple like a gust, gripping the child's
arm till she paled and almost whimpered.

"I--I was just going on an errand for Miss Smith!" she cried.

Looking down into her soul, Zora discerned its innocence and the fright
shining in the child's eyes. Her own eyes softened, her grip became a
caress, but her heart was hard.

The young man laughed awkwardly and strolled away. Zora looked back at
him and the paramount mission of her life formed itself in her mind. She
would protect this girl; she would protect all black girls. She would
make it possible for these poor beasts of burden to be decent in their
toil. Out of protection of womanhood as the central thought, she must
build ramparts against cruelty, poverty, and crime. All this in
turn--but now and first, the innocent girlhood of this daughter of shame
must be rescued from the devil. It was her duty, her heritage. She must
offer this unsullied soul up unto God in mighty atonement--but how? Here
now was no protection. Already lustful eyes were in wait, and the child
was too ignorant to protect herself. She must be sent to
boarding-school, somewhere far away; but the money? God! it was money,
money, always money. Then she stopped suddenly, thrilled with the
recollection of Mrs. Vanderpool's check.

She dismissed the girl with a kiss, and stood still a moment
considering. Money to send Emma off to school; money to buy a school
farm; money to "buy" tenants to live on it; money to furnish them
rations; money--

She went straight to Miss Smith.

"Miss Smith, how much money have you?" Miss Smith's hand trembled a bit.
Ah, that splendid strength of young womanhood--if only she herself had
it! But perhaps Zora was the chosen one. She reached up and took down a
well-worn book.

"Zora," she said slowly, "I've been going to tell you ever since you
came, but I hadn't the courage. Zora," Miss Smith hesitated and gripped
the book with thin white fingers, "I'm afraid--I almost know that this
school is doomed."

There lay a silence in the room while the two women stared into each
other's souls with startled eyes. Swallowing hard, Miss Smith spoke.

"When I thought the endowment sure, I mortgaged the school in order to
buy Tolliver's land. The endowment failed, as you know, because--perhaps
I was too stubborn."

But Zora's eyes snapped "No!" and Miss Smith continued:

"I borrowed ten thousand dollars. Then I tried to get the land, but
Tolliver kept putting me off, and finally I learned that Colonel
Cresswell had bought it. It seems that Tolliver got caught tight in the
cotton corner, and that Cresswell, through John Taylor, offered him
twice what he had agreed to sell to me for, and he took it. I don't
suppose Taylor knew what he was doing; I hope he didn't.

"Well, there I was with ten thousand dollars idle on my hands, paying
ten per cent on it and getting less than three per cent. I tried to get
the bank to take the money back, but they refused. Then I was
tempted--and fell." She paused, and Zora took both her hands in her own.

"You see," continued Miss Smith, "just as soon as the announcement of
the prospective endowment was sent broadcast by the press, the donations
from the North fell off. Letter after letter came from old friends of
the school full of congratulations, but no money. I ought to have cut
down the teaching force to the barest minimum, and gone North
begging--but I couldn't. I guess my courage was gone. I knew how I'd
have to explain and plead, and I just could not. So I used the ten
thousand dollars to pay its own interest and help run the school.
Already it's half gone, and when the rest goes then will come the end."

Without, the great red sun paused a moment over the edge of the swamp,
and the long, low cry of night birds broke sadly on the twilight
silence. Zora sat stroking the lined hands.

"Not the end," she spoke confidently. "It cannot end like this. I've got
a little money that Mrs. Vanderpool gave me, and somehow we must get
more. Perhaps I might go North and--beg." She shivered. Then she sat up
resolutely and turned to the book.

"Let's go over matters carefully," she proposed.

Together they counted and calculated.

"The balance is four thousand seven hundred and ninety-eight dollars,"
said Miss Smith.

"Yes, and then there's Mrs. Vanderpool's check."

"How much is that?"

Zora paused; she did not know. In her world there was little calculation
of money. Credit and not cash is the currency of the Black Belt. She had
been pleased to receive the check, but she had not examined it.

"I really don't know," she presently confessed. "I think it was one
thousand dollars; but I was so hurried in leaving that I didn't look
carefully," and the wild thought surged in her, suppose it was more!

She ran into the other room and plunged into her trunk; beneath the
clothes, beneath the beauty of the Silver Fleece, till her fingers
clutched and tore the envelope. A little choking cry burst from her
throat, her knees trembled so that she was obliged to sit down.

In her fingers fluttered a check for--_ten thousand dollars!_

It was not until the next day that the two women were sufficiently
composed to talk matters over sanely.

"What is your plan?" asked Zora.

"To put the money in a Northern savings bank at three per cent interest;
to supply the rest of the interest, and the deficit in the running
expenses, from our balance, and to send you North to beg."

Zora shook her head. "It won't do," she objected. "I'd make a poor
beggar; I don't know human nature well enough, and I can't talk to rich
white folks the way they expect us to talk."

"It wouldn't be hypocrisy, Zora; you would be serving in a great cause.
If you don't go, I--"

"Wait! You sha'n't go. If any one goes it must be me. But let's think it
out: we pay off the mortgage, we get enough to run the school as it has
been run. Then what? There will still be slavery and oppression all
around us. The children will be kept in the cotton fields; the men will
be cheated, and the women--" Zora paused and her eyes grew hard.

She began again rapidly: "We must have land--our own farm with our own
tenants--to be the beginning of a free community."

Miss Smith threw up her hands impatiently.

"But sakes alive! Where, Zora? Where can we get land, with Cresswell
owning every inch and bound to destroy us?"

Zora sat hugging her knees and staring out the window toward the sombre
ramparts of the swamp. In her eyes lay slumbering the madness of long
ago; in her brain danced all the dreams and visions of childhood.

"I'm thinking," she murmured, "of buying the swamp."




_Thirty-three_

THE BUYING OF THE SWAMP


"It's a shame," asserted John Taylor with something like real feeling.
He was spending Sunday with his father-in-law, and both, over their
after-dinner cigars, were gazing thoughtfully at the swamp.

"What's a shame?" asked Colonel Cresswell.

"To see all that timber and prime cotton-land going to waste. Don't you
remember those fine bales of cotton that came out of there several
seasons ago?"

The Colonel smoked placidly. "You can't get it cleared," he said.

"But couldn't you hire some good workers?"

"Niggers won't work. Now if we had Italians we might do it."

"Yes, and in a few years they'd own the country."

"That's right; so there we are. There's only one way to get that swamp
cleared."

"How?"

"Sell it to some fool darkey."

"Sell it? It's too valuable to sell."

"That's just it. You don't understand. The only way to get decent work
out of some niggers is to let them believe they're buying land. In nine
cases out of ten he works hard a while and then throws up the job. We
get back our land and he makes good wages for his work."

"But in the tenth case--suppose he should stick to it?"

"Oh,"--easily, "we could get rid of him when we want to. White people
rule here."

John Taylor frowned and looked a little puzzled. He was no moralist, but
he had his code and he did not understand Colonel Cresswell. As a matter
of fact, Colonel Cresswell was an honest man. In most matters of
commerce between men he was punctilious to a degree almost annoying to
Taylor. But there was one part of the world which his code of honor did
not cover, and he saw no incongruity in the omission. The uninitiated
cannot easily picture to himself the mental attitude of a former
slaveholder toward property in the hands of a Negro. Such property
belonged of right to the master, if the master needed it; and since
ridiculous laws safeguarded the property, it was perfectly permissible
to circumvent such laws. No Negro starved on the Cresswell place,
neither did any accumulate property. Colonel Cresswell saw to both
matters.

As the Colonel and John Taylor were thus conferring, Zora appeared,
coming up the walk.

"Who's that?" asked the Colonel shading his eyes.

"It's Zora--the girl who went North with Mrs. Vanderpool," Taylor
enlightened him.

"Back, is she? Too trifling to stick to a job, and full of Northern
nonsense," growled the Colonel. "Even got a Northern walk--I thought for
a moment she was a lady."

Neither of the gentlemen ever dreamed how long, how hard, how
heart-wringing was that walk from the gate up the winding way beneath
their careless gaze. It was not the coming of the thoughtless, careless
girl of five years ago who had marched a dozen times unthinking before
the faces of white men. It was the approach of a woman who knew how the
world treated women whom it respected; who knew that no such treatment
would be thought of in her case: neither the bow, the lifted hat, nor
even the conventional title of decency. Yet she must go on naturally and
easily, boldly but circumspectly, and play a daring game with two
powerful men.

"Can I speak with you a moment, Colonel?" she asked.

The Colonel did not stir or remove his cigar; he even injected a little
gruffness into his tone.

"Well, what is it?"

Of course, she was not asked to sit, but she stood with her hands
clasped loosely before her and her eyes half veiled.

"Colonel, I've got a thousand dollars." She did not mention the other
nine.

The Colonel sat up.

"Where did you get it?" he asked.

"Mrs. Vanderpool gave it to me to use in helping the colored people."

"What are you going to do with it?"

"Well, that's just what I came to see you about. You see, I might give
it to the school, but I've been thinking that I'd like to buy some land
for some of the tenants."

"I've got no land to sell," said the Colonel.

"I was thinking you might sell a bit of the swamp."

Cresswell and Taylor glanced at each other and the Colonel re-lit his
cigar.

"How much of it?" he asked finally.

"I don't know; I thought perhaps two hundred acres."

"Two hundred acres? Do you expect to buy that land for five dollars an
acre?"

"Oh, no, sir. I thought it might cost as much as twenty-five dollars."

"But you've only got a thousand dollars."

"Yes, sir; I thought I might pay that down and then pay the rest from
the crops."

"Who's going to work on the place?"

Zora named a number of the steadiest tenants to whom she had spoken.

"They owe me a lot of money," said the Colonel.

"We'd try to pay that, too."

Colonel Cresswell considered. There was absolutely no risk. The cost of
the land, the back debts of the tenants--no possible crops could pay for
them. Then there was the chance of getting the swamp cleared for almost
nothing.

"How's the school getting on?" he asked suddenly.

"Very poorly," answered Zora sadly. "You know it's mortgaged, and Miss
Smith has had to use the mortgage money for yearly expenses."

The Colonel smiled grimly.

"It will cost you fifty dollars an acre," he said finally. Zora looked
disappointed and figured out the matter slowly.

"That would be one thousand down and nine thousand to pay--"

"With interest," said Cresswell.

Zora shook her head doubtfully.

"What would the interest be?" she asked.

"Ten per cent."

She stood silent a moment and Colonel Cresswell spoke up:

"It's the best land about here and about the only land you can buy--I
wouldn't sell it to anybody else."

She still hesitated.

"The trouble is, you see, Colonel Cresswell, the price is high and the
interest heavy. And after all I may not be able to get as many tenants
as I'd need. I think though, I'd try it if--if I could be sure you'd
treat me fairly, and that I'd get the land if I paid for it."

Colonel Cresswell reddened a little, and John Taylor looked away.

"Well, if you don't want to undertake it, all right."

Zora looked thoughtfully across the field--

"Mr. Maxwell has a bit of land," she began meditatively.

"Worked out, and not worth five dollars an acre!" snapped the Colonel.
But he did not propose to hand Maxwell a thousand dollars. "Now, see
here, I'll treat you as well as anybody, and you know it."

"I believe so, sir," acknowledged Zora in a tone that brought a sudden
keen glance from Taylor; but her face was a mask. "I reckon I'll make
the bargain."

"All right. Bring the money and we'll fix the thing up."

"The money is here," said Zora, taking an envelope out of her bosom.

"Well, leave it here, and I'll see to it."

"But you see, sir, Miss Smith is so methodical; she expects some papers
or receipts."

"Well, it's too late tonight."

"Possibly you could sign a sort of receipt and later--"

Cresswell laughed. "Well, write one," he indulgently assented. And Zora
wrote.

When Zora left Colonel Cresswell's about noon that Sunday she knew her
work had just begun, and she walked swiftly along the country roads,
calling here and there. Would Uncle Isaac help her build a log home?
Would the boys help her some time to clear some swamp land? Would Rob
become a tenant when she asked? For this was the idle time of the year.
Crops were laid by and planting had not yet begun.

This too was the time of big church meetings. She knew that in her part
of the country on that day the black population, man, woman, and child,
were gathered in great groups; all day they had been gathering,
streaming in snake-like lines along the country roads, in well-brushed,
brilliant attire, half fantastic, half crude. Down where the
Toomsville-Montgomery highway dipped to the stream that fed the
Cresswell swamp squatted a square barn that slept through day and weeks
in dull indifference. But on the First Sunday it woke to sudden mighty
life. The voices of men and children mingled with the snorting of
animals and the cracking of whips. Then came the long drone and
sing-song of the preacher with its sharp wilder climaxes and the
answering "amens" and screams of the worshippers. This was the shrine of
the Baptists--shrine and oracle, centre and source of inspiration--and
hither Zora hurried.

The preacher was Jones, a big man, fat, black, and greasy, with little
eyes, unctuous voice, and three manners: his white folks manner, soft,
humble, wheedling; his black folks manner, voluble, important,
condescending; and above all, his pulpit manner, loud, wild, and strong.
He was about to don this latter cloak when Zora approached with a
request briefly to address the congregation. Remembering some former
snubs, his manner was lordly.

"I doesn't see," he returned reflectively, wiping his brows, "as how I
can rightly spare you any time; the brethren is a-gettin' mighty
onpatient to hear me." He pulled down his cuffs, regarding her
doubtfully.

"I might speak after you're through," she suggested. But he objected
that there was the regular collection and two or three other
collections, a baptism, a meeting of the trustees; there was no time, in
short; but--he eyed her again.

"Does you want--a collection?" he questioned suspiciously, for he could
imagine few other reasons for talking. Then, too, he did not want to be
too inflexible, for all of his people knew Zora and liked her.

"Oh, no, I want no collection at all. I only want a little voluntary
work on their part." He looked relieved, frowned through the door at the
audience, and looked at his bright gold watch. The whole crowd was not
there yet--perhaps--

"You kin say just a word before the sermont," he finally yielded; "but
not long--not long. They'se just a-dying to hear me."

So Zora spoke simply but clearly: of neglect and suffering, of the sins
of others that bowed young shoulders, of the great hope of the
children's future. Then she told something of what she had seen and read
of the world's newer ways of helping men and women. She talked of
cooperation and refuges and other efforts; she praised their way of
adopting children into their own homes; and then finally she told them
of the land she was buying for new tenants and the helping hands she
needed. The preacher fidgeted and coughed but dared not actually
interrupt, for the people were listening breathless to a kind of
straightforward talk which they seldom heard and for which they were
hungering.

And Zora forgot time and occasion. The moments flew; the crowd increased
until the wonderful spell of those dark and upturned faces pulsed in her
blood. She felt the wild yearning to help them beating in her ears and
blinding her eyes.

"Oh, my people!" she almost sobbed. "My own people, I am not asking you
to help others; I am pleading with you to help yourselves. Rescue your
own flesh and blood--free yourselves--free yourselves!" And from the
swaying sobbing hundreds burst a great "Amen!" The minister's dusky face
grew more and more sombre, and the angry sweat started on his brow. He
felt himself hoaxed and cheated, and he meant to have his revenge. Two
hundred men and women rose and pledged themselves to help Zora; and when
she turned with overflowing heart to thank the preacher he had left the
platform, and she found him in the yard whispering darkly with two
deacons. She realized her mistake, and promised to retrieve it during
the week; but the week was full of planning and journeying and talking.

Saturday dawned cool and clear. She had dinner prepared for cooking in
the yard: sweet potatoes, hoe-cake, and buttermilk, and a hog to be
barbecued. Everything was ready by eight o'clock in the morning. Emma
and two other girl helpers were on the tip-toe of expectancy. Nine
o'clock came and no one with it. Ten o'clock came, and eleven. High
noon found Zora peering down the highway under her shading hand, but no
soul in sight. She tried to think it out: what could have happened? Her
people were slow, tardy, but they would not thus forget her and
disappoint her without some great cause. She sent the girls home at dusk
and then seated herself miserably under the great oak; then at last one
half-grown boy hurried by.

"I wanted to come, Miss Zora, but I was afeared. Preacher Jones has been
talking everywhere against you. He says that your mother was a voodoo
woman and that you don't believe in God, and the deacons voted that the
members mustn't help you."

"And do the people believe that?" she asked in consternation.

"They just don't know what to say. They don't 'zactly believe it, but
they has to 'low that you didn't say much 'bout religion when you
talked. You ain't been near Big Meetin'--and--and--you ain't saved." He
hurried on.

Zora leaned her head back wearily, watching the laced black branches
where the star-light flickered through--as coldly still and immovable as
she had watched them from those gnarled roots all her life--and she
murmured bitterly the world-old question of despair: "What's the use?"
It seemed to her that every breeze and branch was instinct with
sympathy, and murmuring, "What's the use?" She wondered vaguely why, and
as she wondered, she knew.

For yonder where the black earth of the swamp heaved in a formless mound
she felt the black arms of Elspeth rising from the sod--gigantic,
mighty. They stole toward her with stealthy hands and claw-like talons.
They clutched at her skirts. She froze and could not move. Down, down
she slipped toward the black slime of the swamp, and the air about was
horror--down, down, till the chilly waters stung her knees; and then
with one grip she seized the oak, while the great hand of Elspeth
twisted and tore her soul. Faint, afar, nearer and nearer and ever
mightier, rose a song of mystic melody. She heard its human voice and
sought to cry aloud. She strove again and again with that gripping,
twisting pain--that awful hand--until the shriek came and she awoke.

She lay panting and sweating across the bent and broken roots of the
oak. The hand of Elspeth was gone but the song was still there. She rose
trembling and listened. It was the singing of the Big Meeting in the
church far away. She had forgotten this religious revival in her days of
hurried preparation, and the preacher had used her absence and apparent
indifference against her and her work. The hand of Elspeth was reaching
from the grave to pull her back; but she was no longer dreaming now.
Drawing her shawl about her, she hurried down the highway.

The meeting had overflowed the church and spread to the edge of the
swamp. The tops of young trees had been bent down and interlaced to form
a covering and benches twined to their trunks. Thus a low and wide
cathedral, all green and silver in the star-light, lay packed with a
living mass of black folk. Flaming pine torches burned above the
devotees; the rhythm of their stamping, the shout of their voices, and
the wild music of their singing shook the night. Four hundred people
fell upon their knees when the huge black preacher, uncoated, red-eyed,
frenzied, stretched his long arms to heaven. Zora saw the throng from
afar, and hesitated. After all, she knew little of this strange faith of
theirs--had little belief in its mummery. She herself had been brought
up almost without religion save some few mystic remnants of a
half-forgotten heathen cult. The little she had seen of religious
observance had not moved her greatly, save once yonder in Washington.
There she found God after a searching that had seared her soul; but He
had simply pointed the Way, and the way was human.

Humanity was near and real. She loved it. But if she talked again of
mere men would these devotees listen? Already the minister had spied her
tall form and feared her power. He set his powerful voice and the frenzy
of his hearers to crush her.

"Who is dis what talks of doing the Lord's work for Him? What does de
good Book say? Take no thought 'bout de morrow. Why is you trying to
make dis ole world better? I spits on the world! Come out from it. Seek
Jesus. Heaven is my home! Is it yo's?" "Yes," groaned the multitude. His
arm shot out and he pointed straight at Zora.

"Beware the ebil one!" he shouted, and the multitude moaned. "Beware of
dem dat calls ebil good. Beware of dem dat worships debbils; the debbils
dat crawl; de debbils what forgits God."

"Help him, Lord!" cried the multitude.

Zora stepped into the circle of light. A hush fell on the throng; the
preacher paused a moment, then started boldly forward with upraised
hands. Then a curious thing happened. A sharp cry arose far off down
toward the swamp and the sound of great footsteps coming, coming as from
the end of the world; there swelled a rhythmical chanting, wilder and
more primitive than song. On, on it came, until it swung into sight. An
old man led the band--tall, massive, with tufted gray hair and wrinkled
leathery skin, and his eyes were the eyes of death. He reached the
circle of light, and Zora started: once before she had seen that old
man. The singing stopped but he came straight on till he reached Zora's
side and then he whirled and spoke.

The words leaped and flew from his lips as he lashed the throng with
bitter fury. He said what Zora wanted to say with two great differences:
first, he spoke their religious language and spoke it with absolute
confidence and authority; and secondly, he seemed to know each one there
personally and intimately so that he spoke to no inchoate throng--he
spoke to them individually, and they listened awestruck and fearsome.

"God is done sent me," he declared in passionate tones, "to preach His
acceptable time. Faith without works is dead; who is you that dares to
set and wait for the Lord to do your work?" Then in sudden fury, "Ye
generation of vipers--who kin save you?" He bent forward and pointed his
long finger. "Yes," he cried, "pray, Sam Collins, you black devil; pray,
for the corn you stole Thursday." The black figure moved. "Moan, Sister
Maxwell, for the backbiting you did today. Yell, Jack Tolliver, you
sneaking scamp, t'wil the Lord tell Uncle Bill who ruined his daughter.
Weep, May Haynes, for that baby--"

But the woman's shriek drowned his words, and he whirled full on the
preacher, stamping his feet and waving his hands. His anger choked him;
the fat preacher cowered gray and trembling. The gaunt fanatic towered
over him.

"You--you--ornery hound of Hell! God never knowed you and the devil owns
your soul!" There leapt from his lips a denunciation so livid, specific,
and impassioned that the preacher squatted and bowed, then finally fell
upon his face and moaned.

The gaunt speaker turned again to the people. He talked of little
children; he pictured their sin and neglect. "God is done sent me to
offer you all salvation," he cried, while the people wept and wailed;
"not in praying, but in works. Follow me!" The hour was halfway between
midnight and dawn, but nevertheless the people leapt frenziedly to their
feet.

"Follow me!" he shouted.

And, singing and chanting, the throng poured out upon the black highway,
waving their torches. Zora knew his intention. With a half-dozen of
younger onlookers she unhitched teams and rode across the land, calling
at the cabins. Before sunrise, tools were in the swamp, axes and saws
and hammers. The noise of prayer and singing filled the Sabbath dawn.
The news of the great revival spread, and men and women came pouring in.
Then of a sudden the uproar stopped, and the ringing of axes and grating
of saws and tugging of mules was heard. The forest trembled as by some
mighty magic, swaying and falling with crash on crash. Huge bonfires
blazed and crackled, until at last a wide black scar appeared in the
thick south side of the swamp, which widened and widened to full twenty
acres.

The sun rose higher and higher till it blazed at high noon. The workers
dropped their tools. The aroma of coffee and roasting meat rose in the
dim cool shade. With ravenous appetites the dark, half-famished throng
fell upon the food, and then in utter weariness stretched themselves and
slept: lying along the earth like huge bronze earth-spirits, sitting
against trees, curled in dense bushes.

And Zora sat above them on a high rich-scented pile of logs. Her senses
slept save her sleepless eyes. Amid a silence she saw in the little
grove that still stood, the cabin of Elspeth tremble, sigh, and
disappear, and with it flew some spirit of evil.

Then she looked down to the new edge of the swamp, by the old lagoon,
and saw Bles Alwyn standing there. It seemed very natural; and closing
her eyes, she fell asleep.




_Thirty-four_

THE RETURN OF ALWYN


Bles Alwyn stared at Mrs. Harry Cresswell in surprise. He had not seen
her since that moment at the ball, and he was startled at the change.
Her abundant hair was gone; her face was pale and drawn, and there were
little wrinkles below her sunken eyes. In those eyes lurked the tired
look of the bewildered and the disappointed. It was in the lofty
waiting-room of the Washington station where Alwyn had come to meet a
friend. Mrs. Cresswell turned and recognized him with genuine pleasure.
He seemed somehow a part of the few things in the world--little and
unimportant perhaps--that counted and stood firm, and she shook his hand
cordially, not minding the staring of the people about. He took her bag
and carried it towards the gate, which made the observers breathe
easier, seeing him in servile duty. Someway, she knew not just how, she
found herself telling him of the crisis in her life before she realized;
not everything, of course, but a great deal. It was much as though she
were talking to some one from another world--an outsider; but one she
had known long, one who understood. Both from what she recounted and
what she could not tell he gathered the substance of the story, and it
bewildered him. He had not thought that white people had such troubles;
yet, he reflected, why not? They, too, were human.

"I suppose you hear from the school?" he ventured after a pause.

"Why, yes--not directly--but Zora used to speak of it."

Bles looked up quickly.

"Zora?"

"Yes. Didn't you see her while she was here? She has gone back now."

Then the gate opened, the crowd surged through, sweeping them apart, and
next moment he was alone.

Alwyn turned slowly away. He forgot the friend he was to meet. He forgot
everything but the field of the Silver Fleece. It rose shadowy there in
the pale concourse, swaying in ghostly breezes. The purple of its
flowers mingled with the silver radiance of tendrils that trembled
across the hurrying throng, like threads of mists along low hills. In
its midst rose a dark, slim, and quivering form. She had been here--here
in Washington! Why had he not known? What was she doing? "She has gone
back now"--back to the Sun and the Swamp, back to the Burden.

Why should not he go back, too? He walked on thinking. He had failed.
His apparent success had been too sudden, too overwhelming, and when he
had faced the crisis his hand had trembled. He had chosen the Right--but
the Right was ineffective, impotent, almost ludicrous. It left him
shorn, powerless, and in moral revolt. The world had suddenly left him,
as the vision of Carrie Wynn had left him, alone, a mere clerk, an
insignificant cog in the great grinding wheel of humdrum drudgery. His
chance to do and thereby to be had not come.

He thought of Zora again. Why not go back to the South where she had
gone? He shuddered as one who sees before him a cold black pool whither
his path leads. To face the proscription, the insult, the lawless hate
of the South again--never! And yet he went home and sat down and wrote a
long letter to Miss Smith.

The reply that came after some delay was almost curt. It answered few of
his questions, argued with none of his doubts, and made no mention of
Zora. Yes, there was need of a manager for the new farm and settlement.
She was not sure whether Alwyn could do the work or not. The salary was
meagre and the work hard. If he wished it, he must decide immediately.

Two weeks later found Alwyn on the train facing Southward in the Jim
Crow car. How he had decided to go back South he did not know. In fact,
he had not decided. He had sat helpless and inactive in the grip of
great and shadowed hands, and the thing was as yet incomprehensible. And
so it was that the vision Zora saw in the swamp had been real enough,
and Alwyn felt strangely disappointed that she had given no sign of
greeting on recognition.

In other ways, too, Zora, when he met her, was to him a new creature.
She came to him frankly and greeted him, her gladness shining in her
eyes, yet looking nothing more than gladness and saying nothing more.
Just what he had expected was hard to say; but he had left her on her
knees in the dirt with outstretched hands, and somehow he had expected
to return to some corresponding mental attitude. The physical change of
these three years was marvellous. The girl was a woman, well-rounded and
poised, tall, straight, and quick. And with this went mental change: a
self-mastery; a veiling of the self even in intimate talk; a subtle air
as of one looking from great and unreachable heights down on the dawn of
the world. Perhaps no one who had not known the child and the girl as he
had would have noted all this; but he saw and realized the
transformation with a pang--something had gone; the innocence and wonder
of the child, and in their place had grown up something to him
incomprehensible and occult.

Miss Smith was not to be easily questioned on the subject. She took no
hints and gave no information, and when once he hazarded some pointed
questions she turned on him abruptly, observing acidly: "If I were you
I'd think less of Zora and more of her work."

Gradually, in his spiritual perplexity, Alwyn turned to Mary Cresswell.
She was staying with the Colonel at Cresswell Oaks. Her coming South was
supposed to be solely for reasons of health, and her appearance made
this excuse plausible. She was lonely and restless, and naturally drawn
toward the school. Her intercourse with Miss Smith was only formal, but
her interest in Zora's work grew. Down in the swamp, at the edge of the
cleared space, had risen a log cabin; long, low, spacious, overhung with
oak and pine. It was Zora's centre for her settlement-work. There she
lived, and with her a half-dozen orphan girls and children too young for
the boarding department of the school. Mrs. Cresswell easily fell into
the habit of walking by here each day, coming down the avenue of oaks
across the road and into the swamp. She saw little of Zora personally
but she saw her girls and learned much of her plans.

The rooms of the cottage were clean and light, supplied with books and
pictures, simple toys, and a phonograph. The yard was one wide green and
golden play-ground, and all day the music of children's glad crooning
and the singing of girls went echoing and trembling through the trees,
as they played and sewed and washed and worked.

From the Cresswells and the Maxwells and others came loads of clothes
for washing and mending. The Tolliver girls had simple dresses made,
embroidery was ordered from town, and soon there would be the gardens
and cotton fields. Mrs. Cresswell would saunter down of mornings.
Sometimes she would talk to the big girls and play with the children;
sometimes she would sit hidden in the forest, listening and glimpsing
and thinking, thinking, till her head whirled and the world danced red
before her eyes, today she rose wearily, for it was near noon, and
started home. She saw Alwyn swing along the road to the school
dining-room where he had charge of the students at the noonday meal.

Alwyn wanted Mrs. Cresswell's judgment and advice. He was growing
doubtful of his own estimate of women. Evidently something about his
standards was wrong; consequently he made opportunities to talk with
Mrs. Cresswell when she was about, hoping she would bring up the subject
of Zora of her own accord. But she did not. She was too full of her own
cares and troubles, and she was only too glad of willing and sympathetic
ears into which to pour her thoughts. Miss Smith soon began to look on
these conversations with some uneasiness. Black men and white women
cannot talk together casually in the South and she did not know how far
the North had put notions in Alwyn's head.

Today both met each other almost eagerly.

Mrs. Cresswell had just had a bit of news which only he would fully
appreciate.

"Have you heard of the Vanderpools?" she asked.

"No--except that he was appointed and confirmed at last."

"Well, they had only arrived in France when he died of apoplexy. I do
not know," added Mrs. Cresswell, "I may be wrong and--I hope I'm not
glad." Then there leapt to her mind a hypothetical question which had to
do with her own curious situation. It was characteristic of her to brood
and then restlessly to seek relief in consulting the one person near who
knew her story. She started to open the subject again today.

But Alwyn, his own mind full, spoke first and rapidly. He, too, had
turned to her as he saw her come from Zora's home. He must know more
about the girl. He could no longer endure this silence. Zora beneath her
apparent frankness was impenetrable, and he felt that she carefully
avoided him, although she did it so deftly that he felt rather than
observed it. Miss Smith still systematically snubbed him when he
broached the subject of Zora. With others he did not speak; the matter
seemed too delicate and sacred, and he always had an awful dread lest
sometime, somewhere, a chance and fatal word would be dropped, a breath
of evil gossip which would shatter all. He had hated to obtrude his
troubles on Mrs. Cresswell, who seemed so torn in soul. But today he
must speak, although time pressed.

"Mrs. Cresswell," he began hurriedly, "there's a matter--a personal
matter of which I have wanted to speak--a long time--I--" The
dinner-bell rang, and he stopped, vexed.

"Come up to the house this afternoon," she said; "Colonel Cresswell will
be away--" Then she paused abruptly. A strange startling thought flashed
through her brain. Alwyn noticed nothing. He thanked her cordially and
hurried toward the dining-hall, meeting Colonel Cresswell on horseback
just as he turned into the school gate.

Mary Cresswell walked slowly on, flushing and paling by turns. Could it
be that this Negro had dared to misunderstand her--had presumed? She
reviewed her conduct. Perhaps she had been indiscreet in thus making a
confidant of him in her trouble. She had thought of him as a boy--an old
student, a sort of confidential servant; but what had he thought? She
remembered Miss Smith's warning of years before--and he had been North
since and acquired Northern notions of freedom and equality. She bit her
lip cruelly.

Yet, she mused, she was herself to blame. She had unwittingly made the
intimacy and he was but a Negro, looking on every white woman as a
goddess and ready to fawn at the slightest encouragement. There had been
no one else here to confide in. She could not tell Miss Smith her
troubles, although she knew Miss Smith must suspect. Harry Cresswell,
apparently, had written nothing home of their quarrel. All the neighbors
behaved as if her excuse of ill-health were sufficient to account for
her return South to escape the rigors of a Northern winter. Alwyn, and
Alwyn alone, really knew. Well, it was her blindness, and she must right
it quietly and quickly with hard ruthless plainness. She blushed again
at the shame of it; then she began to excuse.

After all, which was worse--a Cresswell or an Alwyn? It was no sin that
Alwyn had done; it was simply ignorant presumption, and she must correct
him firmly, but gently, like a child. What a crazy muddle the world was!
She thought of Harry Cresswell and the tale he told her in the swamp.
She thought of the flitting ghosts that awful night in Washington. She
thought of Miss Wynn who had jilted Alwyn and given her herself a very
bad quarter of an hour. What a world it was, and after all how far was
this black boy wrong? Just then Colonel Cresswell rode up behind and
greeted her.

She started almost guiltily, and again a sense of the awkwardness of her
position reddened her face and neck. The Colonel dismounted, despite her
protest, and walked beside her. They chatted along indifferently, of the
crops, her brother's new baby, the proposed mill.

"Mary," his voice abruptly struck a new note. "I don't like the way you
talk with that Alwyn nigger."

She was silent.

"Of course," he continued, "you're Northern born and you have been a
teacher in this school and feel differently from us in some ways; but
mark what I say, a nigger will presume on the slightest pretext, and you
must keep them in their place. Then, too, you are a Cresswell now--"

She smiled bitterly; he noticed it, but went on:

"You are a Cresswell, even if you have caught Harry up to some of his
deviltry,"--she started,--"and got miffed about it. It'll all come out
right. You're a Cresswell, and you must hold yourself too high to
'Mister' a nigger or let him dream of any sort of equality."

He spoke pleasantly, but with a certain sharp insistence that struck a
note of fear in Mary's heart. For a moment she thought of writing Alwyn
not to call. But, no; a note would be unwise. She and Colonel Cresswell
lunched rather silently.

"Well, I must get to town," he finally announced. "The mill directors
meet today. If Maxwell calls by about that lumber tell him I'll see him
in town." And away he went.

He had scarcely reached the highway and ridden a quarter of a mile or
so when he spied Bles Alwyn hurrying across the field toward the
Cresswell Oaks. He frowned and rode on. Then reining in his horse, he
stopped in the shadow of the trees and watched Alwyn.

It was here that Zora saw him as she came up from her house. She, too,
stopped, and soon saw whom he was watching. She had been planning to see
Mr. Cresswell about the cut timber on her land. By legal right it was
hers but she knew he would claim half, treating her like a mere tenant.
Seeing him watching Alwyn she paused in the shadow and waited, fearing
trouble. She, too, had felt that the continued conversations of Alwyn
and Mrs. Cresswell were indiscreet, but she hoped that they had
attracted no one else's attention. Now she feared the Colonel was
suspicious and her heart sank. Alwyn went straight toward the house and
disappeared in the oak avenue. Still Colonel Cresswell waited but Zora
waited no longer. Alwyn must be warned. She must reach Cresswell's
mansion before Cresswell did and without him seeing her. This meant a
long detour of the swamp to approach the Oaks from the west. She
silently gathered up her skirts and walked quickly and carefully away.

She was a strong woman, lithe and vigorous, living in the open air and
used to walking. Once out of hearing she threw away her hat and bending
forward ran through the swamp. For a while she ran easily and swiftly.
Then for a moment she grew dizzy and it seemed as though she was
standing still and the swamp in solemn grandeur marching past--in solemn
mocking grandeur. She loosened her dress at the neck and flew on.

She sped at last through the oaks, up the terraces, and slowing down to
an unsteady walk, staggered into the house. No one would wonder at her
being there. She came up now and then and sorted the linen and piled the
baskets for her girls. She entered a side door and listened. The
Colonel's voice sounded impatiently in the front hall.

"Mary! Mary?"

A pause, then an answer:

"Yes, father!"

He started up the front stairway and Zora hurried up the narrow back
stairs, almost overturning a servant.

"I'm after the clothes," she explained. She reached the back landing
just in time to see Colonel Cresswell's head rising up the front
staircase. With a quick bound she almost fell into the first room at the
top of the stairs.

Bles Alwyn had hurried through his dinner duties and hastened to the
Oaks. The questions, the doubts, the uncertainty within him were
clamoring for utterance. How much had Mrs. Cresswell ever known of Zora?
What kind of a woman was Zora now? Mrs. Cresswell had seen her and had
talked to her and watched her. What did she think? Thus he formulated
his questions as he went, half timid, and fearful in putting them and
yet determined to know.

Mrs. Cresswell, waiting for him, was almost panic-stricken. Probably he
would beat round the bush seeking further encouragement; but at the
slightest indication she must crush him ruthlessly and at the same time
point the path of duty. He ought to marry some good girl--not Zora, but
some one. Somehow Zora seemed too unusual and strange for him--too
inhuman, as Mary Cresswell judged humanity. She glanced out from her
seat on the upper verandah over the front porch and saw Alwyn coming.
Where should she receive him? On the porch and have Mr. Maxwell ride up?
In the parlor and have the servants astounded and talking? If she took
him up to her own sitting-room the servants would think he was doing
some work or fetching something for the school. She greeted him briefly
and asked him in.

"Good-afternoon, Bles"--using his first name to show him his place, and
then inwardly recoiling at its note of familiarity. She preceded him
up-stairs to the sitting-room, where, leaving the door ajar, she seated
herself on the opposite side of the room and waited.

He fidgeted, then spoke rapidly.

"Mrs. Cresswell--this is a personal affair." She reddened angrily. "A
love affair"--she paled with something like fear--"and I"--she started
to speak, but could not--"I want to know what you think about Zora?"

"About Zora!" she gasped weakly. The sudden reaction, the revulsion of
her agitated feelings, left her breathless.

"About Zora. You know I loved her dearly as a boy--how dearly I have
only just begun to realize: I've been wondering if I understood--if I
wasn't--"

Mrs. Cresswell got angrily to her feet.

"You have come here to speak to me of that--that--" she choked, and Bles
thought his worst fears realized.

"Mary, Mary!" Colonel Cresswell's voice broke suddenly in upon them.
With a start of fear Mrs. Cresswell rushed out into the hall and closed
the door.

"Mary, has that Alwyn nigger been here this afternoon?" Mr. Cresswell
was coming up-stairs, carrying his riding whip.

"Why, no!" she answered, lying instinctively before she quite realized
what her lie meant. She hesitated. "That is, I haven't seen him. I must
have nodded over my book,"--looking toward the little verandah at the
front of the upper hall, where her easy chair stood with her book. Then
with an awful flash of enlightenment she realized what her lie might
mean, and her heart paused.

Cresswell strode up.

"I saw him come up--he must have entered. He's nowhere downstairs," he
wavered and scowled. "Have you been in your sitting-room?" And then, not
waiting for a reply, he strode to the door.

"But the damned scoundrel wouldn't dare!"

He deliberately placed his hand in his right-hand hip-pocket and threw
open the door.

Mary Cresswell stood frozen. The full horror of the thing burst upon
her. Her own silly misapprehension, the infatuation of Alwyn for Zora,
her thoughtless--no, vindictive--betrayal of him to something worse than
death. She listened for the crack of doom. She heard a bird singing far
down in the swamp; she heard the soft raising of a window and the
closing of a door. And then--great God in heaven! must she live forever
in this agony?--and then, she heard the door bang and Mr. Cresswell's
gruff voice--

"Well, where is he?--he isn't in there!"

Mary Cresswell felt that something was giving way within. She swayed and
would have crashed to the bottom of the staircase if just then she had
not seen at the opposite end of the hall, near the back stairs, Zora and
Alwyn emerge calmly from a room, carrying a basket full of clothes.
Colonel Cresswell stared at them, and Zora instinctively put up her hand
and fastened her dress at the throat. The Colonel scowled, for it was
all clear to him now.

"Look here," he angrily opened upon them, "if you niggers want to meet
around keep out of this house; hereafter I'll send the clothes down. By
God, if you want to make love go to the swamp!" He stamped down the
stairs while an ashy paleness stole beneath the dark-red bronze of
Zora's face.

They walked silently down the road together--the old familiar road.
Alwyn was staring moodily ahead.

"We must get married--before Christmas, Zora," he presently avowed, not
looking at her. He felt the basket pause and he glanced up. Her dark
eyes were full upon him and he saw something in their depths that
brought him to himself and made him realize his blunder.

"Zora!" he stammered, "forgive me! Will you marry me?"

She looked at him calmly with infinite compassion. But her reply was
uttered unhesitantly; distinct, direct.

"No, Bles."




_Thirty-five_

THE COTTON MILL


The people of Toomsville started in their beds and listened. A new song
was rising on the air: a harsh, low, murmuring croon that shook the
village ranged around its old square of dilapadated stores. It was not a
song of joy; it was not a song of sorrow; it was not a song at all,
perhaps, but a confused whizzing and murmuring, as of a thousand
ill-tuned, busy voices. Some of the listeners wondered; but most of the
town cried joyfully, "It's the new cotton-mill!"

John Taylor's head teemed with new schemes. The mill trust of the North
was at last a fact. The small mills had not been able to buy cotton when
it was low because Cresswell was cornering it in the name of the
Farmers' League; now that it was high they could not afford to, and many
surrendered to the trust.

"Next thing," wrote Taylor to Easterly, "is to reduce cost of
production. Too much goes in wages. Gradually transfer mills South."

Easterly argued that the labor was too unskilled in the South and that
to send Northern spinners down would spread labor troubles. Taylor
replied briefly: "Never fear; we'll scare them with a vision of niggers
in the mills!"

Colonel Cresswell was not so easily won over to the new scheme. In the
first place he was angry because the school, which he had come to regard
as on its last legs, somehow still continued to flourish. The
ten-thousand-dollar mortgage had but three more years, and that would
end all; but he had hoped for a crash even earlier. Instead of this,
Miss Smith was cheerfully expanding the work, hiring new teachers, and
especially she had brought to help her two young Negroes whom he
suspected. Colonel Cresswell had prevented the Tolliver land sale, only
to be inveigled himself into Zora's scheme which now began to worry him.
He must evict Zora's tenants as soon as the crops were planted and
harvested. There was nothing unjust about such a course, he argued, for
Negroes anyway were too lazy and shiftless to buy the land. They would
not, they could not, work without driving. All this he imparted to John
Taylor, to which that gentleman listened carefully.

"H'm, I see," he owned. "And I know the way out."

"How?"

"A cotton mill in Toomsville."

"What's that got to do with it?"

"Bring in whites."

"But I don't want poor white trash; I'd sooner have niggers."

"Now, see here," argued Taylor, "you can't have everything you
want--day's gone by for aristocracy of old kind. You must have
neighbors: choose, then, white or black. I say white."

"But they'll rule us--out-vote us--marry our daughters," warmly objected
the Colonel.

"Some of them may--most of them won't. A few of them with brains will
help us rule the rest with money. We'll plant cotton mills beside the
cotton fields, use whites to keep niggers in their place, and the fear
of niggers to keep the poorer whites in theirs."

The Colonel looked thoughtful.

"There's something in that," he confessed after a while; "but it's a
mighty big experiment, and it may go awry."

"Not with brains and money to guide it. And at any rate, we've got to
try it; it's the next logical step, and we must take it."

"But in the meantime, I'm not going to give up good old methods; I'm
going to set the sheriff behind these lazy niggers," said the Colonel;
"and I'm going to stop that school putting notions into their heads."

In three short months the mill at Toomsville was open and its wheels
whizzing to the boundless pride of the citizens.

"Our enterprise, sir!" they said to the strangers on the strength of the
five thousand dollars locally invested.

Once it had vigor to sing, the song of the mill knew no resting; morning
and evening, day and night it crooned its rhythmic tune; only during the
daylight Sundays did its murmur die to a sibilant hiss. All the week its
doors were filled with the coming and going of men and women and
children: many men, more women, and greater and greater throngs of
children. It seemed to devour children, sitting with its myriad eyes
gleaming and its black maw open, drawing in the pale white mites,
sucking their blood and spewing them out paler and ever paler. The face
of the town began to change, showing a ragged tuberculous looking side
with dingy homes in short and homely rows.

There came gradually a new consciousness to the town. Hitherto town and
country had been ruled by a few great landlords but at the very first
election, Colton, an unknown outsider, had beaten the regular candidate
for sheriff by such a majority that the big property owners dared not
count him out. They had, however, an earnest consultation with John
Taylor.

"It's just as I said," growled Colonel Cresswell, "if you don't watch
out our whole plantation system will be ruined and we'll be governed by
this white trash from the hills."

"There's only one way," sighed Caldwell, the merchant; "we've got to
vote the niggers."

John Taylor laughed. "Nonsense!" he spurned the suggestion. "You're
old-fashioned. Let the mill-hands have the offices. What good will it
do?"

"What good! Why, they'll do as they please with us."

"Bosh! Don't we own the mill? Can't we keep wages where we like by
threatening to bring in nigger labor?"

"No, you can't, permanently," Maxwell disputed, "for they sometime will
call your bluff."

"Let 'em call," said Taylor, "and we'll put niggers in the mills."

"What!" ejaculated the landlords in chorus. Only Maxwell was silent.
"And kill the plantation system?"

"Oh, maybe some time, of course. But not for years; not until you've
made your pile. You don't really expect to keep the darkies down
forever, do you?"

"No, I don't," Maxwell slowly admitted. "This system can't last
always--sometimes I think it can't last long. It's wrong, through and
through. It's built on ignorance, theft, and force, and I wish to God we
had courage enough to overthrow it and take the consequences. I wish it
was possible to be a Southerner and a Christian and an honest man, to
treat niggers and dagoes and white trash like men, and be big enough to
say, 'To Hell with consequences!'"

Colonel Cresswell stared at his neighbor, speechless with bewilderment
and outraged traditions. Such unbelievable heresy from a Northerner or a
Negro would have been natural; but from a Southerner whose father had
owned five hundred slaves--it was incredible! The other landlords
scarcely listened; they were dogged and impatient and they could suggest
no remedy. They could only blame the mill for their troubles.

John Taylor left the conference blithely. "No," he said to the
committee from the new mill-workers' union. "Can't raise wages,
gentlemen, and can't lessen hours. Mill is just started and not yet
paying expenses. You're getting better wages than you ever got. If you
don't want to work, quit. There are plenty of others, white and black,
who want your jobs."

The mention of black people as competitors for wages was like a red rag
to a bull. The laborers got together and at the next election they made
a clean sweep, judge, sheriff, two members of the legislature, and the
registrars of votes. Undoubtedly the following year they would capture
Harry Cresswell's seat in Congress.

The result was curious. From two sides, from landlord and white laborer,
came renewed oppression of black men. The laborers found that their
political power gave them little economic advantage as long as the
threatening cloud of Negro competition loomed ahead. There was some talk
of a strike, but Colton, the new sheriff, discouraged it.

"I tell you, boys, where the trouble lies: it's the niggers. They live
on nothing and take any kind of treatment, and they keep wages down. If
you strike, they'll get your jobs, sure. We'll just have to grin and
bear it a while, but get back at the darkies whenever you can. I'll
stick 'em into the chain-gang every chance I get."

On the other hand, inspired by fright, the grip of the landlords on the
black serfs closed with steadily increasing firmness. They saw one class
rising from beneath them to power, and they tightened the chains on the
other. Matters simmered on in this way, and the only party wholly
satisfied with conditions was John Taylor and the few young Southerners
who saw through his eyes. He was making money. The landlords, on the
contrary, were losing power and prestige, and their farm labor, despite
strenuous efforts, was drifting to town attracted by new and incidental
work and higher wages. The mill-hands were more and more overworked and
underpaid, and hated the Negroes for it in accordance with their
leaders' directions.

At the same time the oppressed blacks and scowling mill-hands could not
help recurring again and again to the same inarticulate thought which no
one was brave enough to voice. Once, however, it came out flatly. It was
when Zora, crowding into the village courthouse to see if she could not
help Aunt Rachel's accused boy, found herself beside a gaunt, overworked
white woman. The woman was struggling with a crippled child and Zora,
turning, lifted him carefully for the weak mother, who thanked her half
timidly. "That mill's about killed him," she said.

At this juncture the manacled boy was led into court, and the woman
suddenly turned again to Zora.

"Durned if I don't think these white slaves and black slaves had ought
ter git together," she declared.

"I think so, too," Zora agreed.

Colonel Cresswell himself caught the conversation and it struck him with
a certain dismay. Suppose such a conjunction should come to pass? He
edged over to John Taylor and spoke to him; but Taylor, who had just
successfully stopped a suit for damages to the injured boy, merely
shrugged his shoulders.

"What's this nigger charged with?" demanded the Judge when the first
black boy was brought up before him.

"Breaking his labor contract."

"Any witnesses?"

"I have the contract here," announced the sheriff. "He refuses to work."

"A year, or one hundred dollars."

Colonel Cresswell paid his fine, and took him in charge.

"What's the charge here?" said the Judge, pointing to Aunt Rachel's boy.

"Attempt to kill a white man."

"Any witnesses?"

"None except the victim."

"And I," said Zora, coming forward.

Both the sheriff and Colonel Cresswell stared at her. Of course, she was
simply a black girl but she was an educated woman, who knew things about
the Cresswell plantations that it was unnecessary to air in court. The
newly elected Judge had not yet taken his seat, and Cresswell's word was
still law in the court. He whispered to the Judge.

"Case postponed," said the Court.

The sheriff scowled.

"Wait till Jim gets on the bench," he growled.

The white bystanders, however, did not seem enthusiastic and one man--he
was a Northern spinner--spoke out plainly.

"It's none o' my business, of course. I've been fired and I'm damned
glad of it. But see here: if you mutts think you're going to beat these
big blokes at their own game of cheating niggers you're daffy. You take
this from me: get together with the niggers and hold up this whole
capitalist gang. If you don't get the niggers first, they'll use 'em as
a club to throw you down. You hear me," and he departed for the train.

Colton was suspicious. The sentiment of joining with the Negroes did not
seem to arouse the bitter resentment he expected. There even came
whispers to his ears that he had sold out to the landlords, and there
was enough truth in the report to scare him. Thus to both parties came
the uncomfortable spectre of the black men, and both sides went to work
to lay the ghost.

Particularly was Colonel Cresswell stirred to action. He realized that
in Bles and Zora he was dealing with a younger class of educated black
folk, who were learning to fight with new weapons. They were, he was
sure, as dissolute and weak as their parents, but they were shrewder and
more aspiring. They must be crushed, and crushed quickly. To this end he
had recourse to two sources of help--Johnson and the whites in town.

Johnson was what Colonel Cresswell repeatedly called "a faithful
nigger." He was one of those constitutionally timid creatures into whom
the servility of his fathers had sunk so deep that it had become
second-nature. To him a white man was an archangel, while the
Cresswells, his father's masters, stood for God. He served them with
dog-like faith, asking no reward, and for what he gave in reverence to
them, he took back in contempt for his fellows--"niggers!" He applied
the epithet with more contempt than the Colonel himself could express.
To the Negroes he was a "white folk's nigger," to be despised and
feared.

To him Colonel Cresswell gave a few pregnant directions. Then he rode to
town, and told Taylor again of his fears of a labor movement which would
include whites and blacks. Taylor could not see any great danger.

"Of course," he conceded, "they'll eventually get together; their
interests are identical. I'll admit it's our game to delay this as long
possible."

"It must be delayed forever, sir."

"Can't be," was the terse response. "But even if they do ally
themselves, our way is easy: separate the leaders, the talented, the
pushers, of both races from their masses, and through them rule the rest
by money."

But Colonel Cresswell shook his head. "It's precisely these leaders of
the Negroes that we mush crush," he insisted. Taylor looked puzzled.

"I thought it was the lazy, shiftless, and criminal Negroes, you
feared?"

"Hang it, no! We can deal with them; we've got whips, chain-gangs,
and--mobs, if need be--no, it's the Negro who wants to climb up that
we've got to beat to his knees."

Taylor could not follow this reasoning. He believed in an aristocracy of
talent alone, and secretly despised Colonel Cresswell's pretensions of
birth. If a man had ability and push Taylor was willing and anxious to
open the way for him, even though he were black. The caste way of
thinking in the South, both as applied to poor whites and to Negroes,
he simply could not understand. The weak and the ignorant of all races
he despised and had no patience with them. "But others--a man's a man,
isn't he?" he persisted. But Colonel Cresswell replied:

"No, never, if he's black, and not always when he's white," and he
stalked away.

Zora sensed fully the situation. She did not anticipate any immediate
understanding with the laboring whites, but she knew that eventually it
would be inevitable. Meantime the Negro must strengthen himself and
bring to the alliance as much independent economic strength as possible.
For the development of her plans she needed Bles Alwyn's constant
cooperation. He was business manager of the school and was doing well,
but she wanted to point out to him the larger field. So long as she was
uncertain of his attitude toward her, it was difficult to act; but now,
since the flash of the imminent tragedy at Cresswell Oaks had cleared
the air, with all its hurt a frank understanding had been made possible.
The very next day Zora chose to show Bles over her new home and grounds,
and to speak frankly to him. They looked at the land, examined the
proposed farm sites, and viewed the living-room and dormitory in the
house.

"You haven't seen my den," said Zora.

"No."

"Miss Smith is in there now; she often hides there. Come."

He went into the large central house and into the living-room, then out
on the porch, beyond which lay the kitchen. But to the left, and at the
end of the porch, was a small building. It was ceiled in dark yellow
pine, with figured denim on the walls. A straight desk of rough hewn
wood stood in the corner by the white-curtained window, and a couch and
two large easy-chairs faced a tall narrow fireplace of uneven stone. A
thick green rag-carpet covered the floor; a few pictures were on the
walls--a Madonna, a scene of mad careering horses, and some sad baby
faces. The room was a unity; things fitted together as if they belonged
together. It was restful and beautiful, from the cheerful pine blaze
before which Miss Smith was sitting, to the square-paned window that let
in the crimson rays of gathering night. All round the room, stopping
only at the fireplace, ran low shelves of the same yellow pine, filled
with books and magazines. He scanned curiously Plato's Republic, Gorky's
"Comrades," a CyclopÃ¦dia of Agriculture, Balzac's novels, Spencer's
"First Principles," Tennyson's Poems.

"This is my university," Zora explained, smiling at his interested
survey. They went out again and wandered down near the old lagoon.

"Now, Bles," she began, "since we understand each other, can we not work
together as good friends?" She spoke simply and frankly, without
apparent effort, and talked on at length of her work and vision.

Somehow he could not understand. His mental attitude toward Zora had
always been one of guidance, guardianship, and instruction. He had been
judging and weighing her from on high, looking down upon her with
thoughts of uplift and development. Always he had been holding her dark
little hands to lead her out of the swamp of life, and always, when in
senseless anger he had half forgotten and deserted her, this vision of
elder brotherhood had still remained. Now this attitude was being
revolutionized. She was proposing to him a plan of wide scope--a bold
regeneration of the land. It was a plan carefully studied out, long
thought of and read about. He was asked to be co-worker--nay, in a sense
to be a follower, for he was ignorant of much.

He hesitated. Then all at once a sense of his utter unworthiness
overwhelmed him. Who was he to stand and judge this unselfish woman? Who
was he to falter when she called? A sense of his smallness and
narrowness, of his priggish blindness, rose like a mockery in his soul.
One thing alone held him back: he was not unwilling to be simply human,
a learner and a follower; but would he as such ever command the love and
respect of this new and inexplicable woman? Would not comradeship on the
basis of the new friendship which she insisted on, be the death of love
and thoughts of love?

Thus he hesitated, knowing that his duty lay clear. In her direst need
he had deserted her. He had left her to go to destruction and expected
that she would. By a superhuman miracle she had risen and seated herself
above him. She was working; here was work to be done. He was asked to
help; he would help. If it killed his old and new-born dream of love,
well and good; it was his punishment.

Yet the sacrifice, the readjustment was hard; he grew to it gradually,
inwardly revolting, feeling always a great longing to take this woman
and make her nestle in his arms as she used to; catching himself again
and again on the point of speaking to her and urging, yet ever again
holding himself back and bowing in silent respect to the dignity of her
life. Only now and then, when their eyes met suddenly or unthinkingly, a
great kindling flash of flame seemed struggling behind showers of tears,
until in a moment she smiled or spoke, and then the dropping veil left
only the frank open glance, unwavering, soft, kind, but nothing more.
Then Alwyn would go wearily away, vexed or disappointed, or merely sad,
and both would turn to their work again.




_Thirty-six_

THE LAND


Colonel Cresswell started all the more grimly to overthrow the new work
at the school because somewhere down beneath his heart a pity and a
wonder were stirring; pity at the perfectly useless struggle to raise
the unraisable, a wonder at certain signs of rising. But it was
impossible--and unthinkable, even if possible. So he squared his jaw and
cheated Zora deliberately in the matter of the cut timber. He placed
every obstacle in the way of getting tenants for the school land. Here
Johnson, the "faithful nigger," was of incalculable assistance. He was
among the first to hear the call for prospective tenants.

The meeting was in the big room of Zora's house, and Aunt Rachel came
early with her cheery voice and smile which faded so quickly to lines of
sorrow and despair, and then twinkled back again. After her hobbled old
Sykes. Fully a half-hour later Rob hurried in.

"Johnson," he informed the others, "has sneaked over to Cresswell's to
tell of this meeting. We ought to beat that nigger up." But Zora asked
him about the new baby, and he was soon deep in child-lore. Higgins and
Sanders came together--dirty, apologetic, and furtive. Then came
Johnson.

"How do, Miss Zora--Mr. Alwyn, I sure is glad to see you, sir. Well, if
there ain't Aunt Rachel! looking as young as ever. And Higgins, you
scamp--Ah, Mr. Sanders--well, gentlemen and ladies, this sure is gwine
to be a good cotton season. I remember--" And he ran on endlessly, now
to this one, now to that, now to all, his little eyes all the while
dancing insinuatingly here and there. About nine o'clock a buggy drove
up and Carter and Simpson came in--Carter, a silent, strong-faced, brown
laborer, who listened and looked, and Simpson, a worried nervous man,
who sat still with difficulty and commenced many sentences but did not
finish them. Alwyn looked at his watch and at Zora, but she gave no sign
until they heard a rollicking song outside and Tylor burst into the
room. He was nearly seven feet high and broad-shouldered, yellow, with
curling hair and laughing brown eyes. He was chewing an enormous quid of
tobacco, the juice of which he distributed generously, and had had just
liquor enough to make him jolly. His entrance was a breeze and a roar.

Alwyn then undertook to explain the land scheme.

"It is the best land in the county--"

"When it's cl'ared," interrupted Johnson, and Simpson looked alarmed.

"It is partially cleared," continued Alwyn, "and our plan is to sell off
small twenty-acre farms--"

"You can't do nothing on twenty acres--" began Johnson, but Tylor laid
his huge hand right over his mouth and said briefly:

"Shut up!"

Alwyn started again: "We shall sell a few twenty-acre farms but keep one
central plantation of one hundred acres for the school. Here Miss Zora
will carry on her work and the school will run a model farm with your
help. We want to centre here agencies to make life better. We want all
sorts of industries; we want a little hospital with a resident physician
and two or three nurses; we want a cooperative store for buying
supplies; we want a cotton-gin and saw-mill, and in the future other
things. This land here, as I have said, is the richest around. We want
to keep this hundred acres for the public good, and not sell it. We are
going to deed it to a board of trustees, and those trustees are to be
chosen from the ones who buy the small farms."

"Who's going to get what's made on this land?" asked Sanders.

"All of us. It is going first to pay for the land, then to support the
Home and the School, and then to furnish capital for industries."

Johnson snickered. "You mean youse gwine to git yo' livin' off it?"

"Yes," answered Alwyn; "but I'm going to work for it."

"Who's gwine--" began Simpson, but stopped helplessly.

"Who's going to tend this land?" asked the practical Carter.

"All of us. Each man is going to promise us so many days' work a year,
and we're going to ask others to help--the women and girls and school
children--they will all help."

"Can you put trust in that sort of help?"

"We can when once the community learns that it pays."

"Does you own the land?" asked Johnson suddenly.

"No; we're buying it, and it's part paid for already."

The discussion became general. Zora moved about among the men whispering
and explaining; while Johnson moved, too, objecting and hinting. At last
he arose.

"Brethren," he began, "the plan's good enough for talkin' but you can't
work it; who ever heer'd tell of such a thing? First place, the land
ain't yours; second place, you can't get it worked; third place, white
folks won't 'low it. Who ever heer'd of such working land on shares?"

"You do it for white folks each day, why not for yourselves," Alwyn
pointed out.

"'Cause we ain't white, and we can't do nothin' like that."

Tylor was asleep and snoring and the others looked doubtfully at each
other. It was a proposal a little too daring for them, a bit too far
beyond their experience. One consideration alone kept them from
shrinking away and that was Zora's influence. Not a man was there whom
she had not helped and encouraged nor who had not perfect faith in her;
in her impetuous hope, her deep enthusiasm, and her strong will. Even
her defects--the hard-held temper, the deeply rooted dislikes--caught
their imagination.

Finally, after several other meetings five men took courage--three of
the best and two of the weakest. During the Spring long negotiations
were entered into by Miss Smith to "buy" the five men. Colonel Cresswell
and Mr. Tolliver had them all charged with large sums of indebtedness
and these sums had to be assumed by the school. As Colonel Cresswell
counted over two thousand dollars of school notes and deposited them
beside the mortgage he smiled grimly for he saw the end. Yet, even then
his hand trembled and that curious doubt came creeping back. He put it
aside angrily and glanced up.

"Nigger wants to talk with you," announced his clerk.

The Colonel sauntered out and found Bles Alwyn waiting.

"Colonel Cresswell," he said, "I have charge of the buying for the
school and our tenants this year and I naturally want to do the best
possible. I thought I'd come over and see about getting my supplies at
your store."

"That's all right; you can get anything you want," said Colonel
Cresswell cheerily, for this to his mind was evidence of sense on the
part of the Negroes. Bles showed his list of needed supplies--seeds,
meat, corn-meal, coffee, sugar, etc. The Colonel glanced over it
carelessly, then moved away.

"All right. Come and get what you want--any time," he called back.

"But about the prices," said Alwyn, following him.

"Oh, they'll be all right."

"Of course. But what I want is an estimate of your lowest cash prices."

"Cash?"

"Yes, sir."

Cresswell thought a while; such a business-like proposition from Negroes
surprised him.

"Well, I'll let you know," he said.

It was nearly a week later before Alwyn approached him again.

"Now, see here," said Colonel Cresswell, "there's practically no
difference between cash and time prices. We buy our stock on time and
you can just as well take advantage of this as not. I have figured out
about what these things will cost. The best thing for you to do is to
make a deposit here and get things when you want them. If you make a
good deposit I'll throw off ten per cent, which is all of my profit."

"Thank you," said Alwyn, but he looked over the account and found the
whole bill at least twice as large as he expected. Without further
parley, he made some excuse and started to town while Mr. Cresswell went
to the telephone.

In town Alwyn went to all the chief merchants one after another and
received to his great surprise practically the same estimate. He could
not understand it. He had estimated the current market prices according
to the Montgomery paper, yet the prices in Toomsville were fifty to a
hundred and fifty per cent higher. The merchant to whom he went last,
laughed.

"Don't you know we're not going to interfere with Colonel Cresswell's
tenants?" He stated the dealers' attitude, and Alwyn saw light. He went
home and told Zora, and she listened without surprise.

"Now to business," she said briskly. "Miss Smith," turning to the
teacher, "as I told you, they're combined against us in town and we must
buy in Montgomery. I was sure it was coming, but I wanted to give
Colonel Cresswell every chance. Bles starts for Montgomery--"

Alwyn looked up. "Does he?" he asked, smiling.

"Yes," said Zora, smiling in turn. "We must lose no further time."

"But there's no train from Toomsville tonight."

"But there's one from Barton in the morning and Barton is only twenty
miles away."

"It is a long walk." Alwyn thought a while, silently. Then he rose. "I'm
going," he said. "Good-bye."

In less than a week the storehouse was full, and tenants were at work.
The twenty acres of cleared swamp land, attended to by the voluntary
labor of all the tenants, was soon bearing a magnificent crop. Colonel
Cresswell inspected all the crops daily with a proprietary air that
would have been natural had these folk been simply tenants, and as such
he persisted in regarding them.

The cotton now growing was perhaps not so uniformly fine as the first
acre of Silver Fleece, but it was of unusual height and thickness.

"At least a bale to the acre," Alwyn estimated, and the Colonel mentally
determined to take two-thirds of the crop. After that he decided that he
would evict Zora immediately; since sufficient land was cleared already
for his purposes and moreover, he had seen with consternation a herd of
cattle grazing in one field on some early green stuff, and heard a drove
of hogs in the swamp. Such an example before the tenants of the Black
Belt would be fatal. He must wait a few weeks for them to pick the
cotton--then, the end. He was fighting the battle of his color and
caste.

The children sang merrily in the brown-white field. The wide baskets,
poised aloft, foamed on the erect and swaying bodies of the dark
carriers. The crop throughout the land was short that year, for prices
had ruled low last season in accordance with the policy of the Combine.
This year they started high again. Would they fall? Many thought so and
hastened to sell.

Zora and Alwyn gathered their tenants' crops, ginned them at the
Cresswells' gin, and carried their cotton to town, where it was
deposited in the warehouse of the Farmers' League.

"Now," said Alwyn, "we would best sell while prices are high."

Zora laughed at him frankly.

"We can't," she said. "Don't you know that Colonel Cresswell will attach
our cotton for rent as soon as it touches the warehouse?"

"But it's ours."

"Nothing is ours. No black man ordinarily can sell his crop without a
white creditor's consent."

Alwyn fumed.

"The best way," he declared, "is to go to Montgomery and get a
first-class lawyer and just fight the thing through. The land is legally
ours, and he has no right to our cotton."

"Yes, but you must remember that no man like Colonel Cresswell regards a
business bargain with a colored man as binding. No white man under
ordinary circumstances will help enforce such a bargain against
prevailing public opinion."

"But if we cannot trust to the justice of the case, and if you knew we
couldn't, why did you try?"

"Because I had to try; and moreover the circumstances are not altogether
ordinary: the men in power in Toomsville now are not the landlords of
this county; they are poor whites. The Judge and sheriff were both
elected by mill-hands who hate Cresswell and Taylor. Then there's a new
young lawyer who wants Harry Cresswell's seat in Congress; he don't know
much law, I'm afraid; but what he don't know of this case I think I do.
I'll get his advice and then--I mean to conduct the case myself," Zora
calmly concluded.

"Without a lawyer!" Bles Alwyn stared his amazement.

"Without a lawyer in court."

"Zora! That would be foolish!"

"Is it? Let's think. For over a year now I've been studying the law of
the case," and she pointed to her law books; "I know the law and most of
the decisions. Moreover, as a black woman fighting a hopeless battle
with landlords, I'll gain the one thing lacking."

"What's that?"

"The sympathy of the court and the bystanders."

"Pshaw! From these Southerners?"

"Yes, from them. They are very human, these men, especially the
laborers. Their prejudices are cruel enough, but there are joints in
their armor. They are used to seeing us either scared or blindly angry,
and they understand how to handle us then, but at other times it is hard
for them to do anything but meet us in a human way."

"But, Zora, think of the contact of the court, the humiliation, the
coarse talk--"

Zora put up her hand and lightly touched his arm. Looking at him, she
said:

"Mud doesn't hurt much. This is my duty. Let me do it."

His eyes fell before the shadow of a deeper rebuke. He arose heavily.

"Very well," he acquiesced as he passed slowly out.

The young lawyer started to refuse to touch the case until he saw--or
did Zora adroitly make him see?--a chance for eventual political
capital. They went over the matter carefully, and the lawyer acquired a
respect for the young woman's knowledge.

"First," he said, "get an injunction on the cotton--then go to court."
And to insure the matter he slipped over and saw the Judge.

Colonel Cresswell next day stalked angrily into his lawyers' office.

"See here," he thundered, handing the lawyer the notice of the
injunction.

"See the Judge," began the lawyer, and then remembered, as he was often
forced to do these days, who was Judge.

He inquired carefully into the case and examined the papers. Then he
said:

"Colonel Cresswell, who drew this contract of sale?"

"The black girl did."

"Impossible!"

"She certainly did--wrote it in my presence."

"Well, it's mighty well done."

"You mean it will stand in law?"

"It certainly will. There's but one way to break it, and that's to
allege misunderstanding on your part."

Cresswell winced. It was not pleasant to go into open court and
acknowledge himself over-reached by a Negro; but several thousand
dollars in cotton and land were at stake.

"Go ahead," he concurred.

"You can depend on Taylor, of course?" added the lawyer.

"Of course," answered Cresswell. "But why prolong the thing?"

"You see, she's got your cotton tied by injunction."

"I don't see how she did it."

"Easy enough: this Judge is the poor white you opposed in the last
primary."

Within a week the case was called, and they filed into the courtroom.
Cresswell's lawyer saw only this black woman--no other lawyer or sign of
one appeared to represent her. The place soon filled with a lazy,
tobacco-chewing throng of white men. A few blacks whispered in one
corner. The dirty stove was glowing with pine-wood and the Judge sat at
a desk.

"Where's your lawyer?" he asked sharply of Zora.

"I have none," returned Zora, rising.

There came a silence in the court. Her voice was low, and the men leaned
forward to listen. The Judge felt impelled to be over-gruff.

"Get a lawyer," he ordered.

"Your honor, my case is simple, and with your honor's permission I wish
to conduct it myself. I cannot afford a lawyer, and I do not think I
need one."

Cresswell's lawyer smiled and leaned back. It was going to be easier
than he supposed. Evidently the woman believed she had no case, and was
weakening.

The trial proceeded, and Zora stated her contention. She told how long
her mother and grandmother had served the Cresswells and showed her
receipt for rent paid.

"A friend sent me some money. I went to Mr. Cresswell and asked him to
sell me two hundred acres of land. He consented to do so and signed this
contract in the presence of his son-in-law."

Just then John Taylor came into the court, and Cresswell beckoned to
him.

"I want you to help me out, John."

"All right," whispered Taylor. "What can I do?"

"Swear that Cresswell didn't mean to sign this," said the lawyer
quickly, as he arose to address the court.

Taylor looked at the paper blankly and then at Cresswell and some
inkling of the irreconcilable difference in the two natures leapt in
both their hearts. Cresswell might gamble and drink and lie "like a
gentleman," but he would never willingly cheat or take advantage of a
white man's financial necessities. Taylor, on the other hand, had a
horror of a lie, never drank nor played games of chance, but his whole
life was speculation and in the business game he was utterly ruthless
and respected no one. Such men could never thoroughly understand each
other. To Cresswell a man who had cheated the whole South out of
millions by a series of misrepresentations ought to regard this little
falsehood as nothing.

Meantime Colonel Cresswell's lawyer was on his feet, and he adopted his
most irritating and contemptuous manner.

"This nigger wench wrote out some illegible stuff and Colonel Cresswell
signed it to get rid of her. We are not going to question the legality
of the form--that's neither here nor there. The point is, Mr. Cresswell
never intended--never dreamed of selling this wench land right in front
of his door. He meant to rent her the land and sign a receipt for rent
paid in advance. I will not worry your honor by a long argument to
prove this, but just call one of the witnesses well known to you--Mr.
John Taylor of the Toomsville mills."

Taylor looked toward the door and then slowly took the stand.

"Mr. Taylor," said the lawyer carelessly, "were you present at this
transaction?"

"Yes."

"Did you see Colonel Cresswell sign this paper?"

"Yes."

"Well, did he intend so far as you know to sign such a paper?"

"I do not know his intentions."

"Did he say he meant to sign such a contract?"

Taylor hesitated.

"Yes," he finally answered. Colonel Cresswell looked up in amazement and
the lawyer dropped his glasses.

"I--I don't think you perhaps understood me, Mr. Taylor," he gasped.
"I--er--meant to ask if Colonel Cresswell, in signing this paper, meant
to sign a contract to sell this wench two hundred acres of land?"

"He said he did," reiterated Taylor. "Although I ought to add that he
did not think the girl would ever be able to pay. If he had thought she
would pay, I don't think he would have signed the paper."

Colonel Cresswell went red, than pale, and leaning forward before the
whole court, he hurled:

"You damned scoundrel!"

The Judge rapped for order and fidgeted in his seat. There was some
confusion and snickering in the courtroom. Finally the Judge plucked up
courage:

"The defendant is ordered to deliver this cotton to Zora Cresswell," he
directed.

The raging of Colonel Cresswell's anger now turned against John Taylor
as well as the Negroes. Wind of the estrangement flew over town quickly.
The poor whites saw a chance to win Taylor's influence and the sheriff
approached him cautiously. Taylor paid him slight courtesy. He was
irritated with this devilish Negro problem; he was making money; his
wife and babies were enjoying life, and here was this fool trial to
upset matters. But the sheriff talked.

"The thing I'm afraid of," he said, "is that Cresswell and his gang will
swing in the niggers on us."

"How do you mean?"

"Let 'em vote."

"But they'd have to read and write."

"Sure!"

"Well, then," said Taylor, "it might be a good thing."

Colton eyed him suspiciously.

"You'd let a nigger vote?"

"Why, yes, if he had sense enough."

"There ain't no nigger got sense."

"Oh, pshaw!" Taylor ejaculated, walking away.

The sheriff was angry and mistrustful. He believed he had discovered a
deep-laid scheme of the aristocrats to cultivate friendliness between
whites and blacks, and then use black voters to crush the whites. Such a
course was, in Colton's mind, dangerous, monstrous, and unnatural; it
must be stopped at all hazards. He began to whisper among his friends.
One or two meetings were held, and the flame of racial prejudice was
studiously fanned.

The atmosphere of the town and country quickly began to change. Whatever
little beginnings of friendship and understanding had arisen now quickly
disappeared. The town of a Saturday no longer belonged to a happy,
careless crowd of black peasants, but the black folk found themselves
elbowed to the gutter, while ugly quarrels flashed here and there with a
quick arrest of the Negroes.

Colonel Cresswell made a sudden resolve. He sent for the sheriff and
received him at the Oaks, in his most respectable style, filling him
with good food, and warming him with good liquor.

"Colton," he asked, "are you sending any of your white children to the
nigger school yet?"

"What!" yelled Colton.

The Colonel laughed, frankly telling Colton John Taylor's philosophy on
the race problem,--his willingness to let Negroes vote; his threat to
let blacks and whites work together; his contempt for the officials
elected by the people.

"Candidly, Colton," he concluded, "I believe in aristocracy. I can't
think it right or wise to replace the old aristocracy by new and untried
blood." And in a sudden outburst--"But, by God, sir! I'm a white man,
and I place the lowest white man ever created above the highest darkey
ever thought of. This Yankee, Taylor, is a nigger-lover. He's secretly
encouraging and helping them. You saw what he did to me, and I'm warning
you in time."

Colton's glass dropped.

"I thought it was you that was corralling the niggers against us," he
exclaimed.

The Colonel reddened. "I don't count all white men my equals, I admit,"
he returned with dignity, "but I know the difference between a white man
and a nigger."

Colton stretched out his massive hand. "Put it there, sir," said he; "I
misjudged you, Colonel Cresswell. I'm a Southerner, and I honor the old
aristocracy you represent. I'm going to join with you to crush this
Yankee and put the niggers in their places. They are getting impudent
around here; they need a lesson and, by gad! they'll get one they'll
remember."

"Now, see here, Colton,--nothing rash," the Colonel charged him,
warningly. "Don't stir up needless trouble; but--well, things must
change."

Colton rose and shook his head.

"The niggers need a lesson," he muttered as he unsteadily bade his host
good-bye. Cresswell watched him uncomfortably as he rode away, and
again a feeling of doubt stirred within him. What new force was he
loosening against his black folk--his own black folk, who had lived
about him and his fathers nigh three hundred years? He saw the huge form
of the sheriff loom like an evil spirit a moment on the rise of the road
and sink into the night. He turned slowly to his cheerless house
shuddering as he entered the uninviting portals.




_Thirty-seven_

THE MOB


When Emma, Bertie's child, came home after a two years' course of study,
she had passed from girlhood to young womanhood. She was white, and
sandy-haired. She was not beautiful, and she appeared to be fragile; but
she also looked sweet and good, with that peculiar innocence which peers
out upon the world with calm, round eyes and sees no evil, but does
methodically its simple, everyday work. Zora mothered her, Miss Smith
found her plenty to do, and Bles thought her a good girl. But Mrs.
Cresswell found her perfect, and began to scheme to marry her off. For
Mary Cresswell, with the restlessness and unhappiness of an unemployed
woman, was trying to atone for her former blunders.

Her humiliation after the episode at Cresswell Oaks had been complete.
It seemed to her that the original cause of her whole life punishment
lay in her persistent misunderstanding of the black people and their
problem. Zora appeared to her in a new and glorified light--a vigorous,
self-sacrificing woman. She knew that Zora had refused to marry Bles,
and this again seemed fitting. Zora was not meant for marrying; she was
a born leader, wedded to a great cause; she had long outgrown the boy
and girl affection. She was the sort of woman she herself might have
been if she had not married.

Alwyn, on the other hand, needed a wife; he was a great, virile boy,
requiring a simple, affectionate mate. No sooner did she see Emma than
she was sure that this was the ideal wife. She compared herself with
Helen Cresswell. Helen was a contented wife and mother because she was
fitted for the position, and happy in it; while she who had aimed so
high had fallen piteously. From such a fate she would save Zora and
Bles.

Emma's course in nurse-training had been simple and short and there was
no resident physician; but Emma, in her unemotional way, was a born
nurse and did much good among the sick in the neighborhood. Zora had a
small log hospital erected with four white beds, a private room, and an
office which was also Emma's bedroom. The new white physician in town,
just fresh from school in Atlanta, became interested and helped with
advice and suggestions.

Meantime John Taylor's troubles began to increase. Under the old
political regime it had been an easy matter to avoid serious
damage-suits for the accidents in the mill. Much child labor and the
lack of protective devices made accidents painfully frequent. Taylor
insisted that the chief cause was carelessness, while the mill hands
alleged criminal neglect on his part. When the new labor officials took
charge of the court and the break occurred between Colonel Cresswell and
his son-in-law, Taylor found that several damage-suits were likely to
cost him a considerable sum.

He determined not to let the bad feelings go too far, and when a
particularly distressing accident to a little girl took place, he showed
more than his usual interest and offered to care for her. The new young
physician recommended Zora's infirmary as the only near place that
offered a chance for the child's recovery.

"Take her out," Taylor promptly directed.

Zora was troubled when the child came. She knew the suspicious temper of
the town whites. The very next day Taylor sent out a second case, a
child who had been hurt some time before and was not recovering as she
should. Under the care of the little hospital and the gentle nurse the
children improved rapidly, and in two weeks were outdoors, playing with
the little black children and even creeping into classrooms and
listening. The grateful mothers came out twice a week at least; at first
with suspicious aloofness, but gradually melting under Zora's tact until
they sat and talked with her and told their troubles and struggles. Zora
realized how human they were, and how like their problems were to hers.
They and their children grew to love this busy, thoughtful woman, and
Zora's fears were quieted.

The catastrophe came suddenly. The sheriff rode by, scowling and hunting
for some poor black runaway, when he saw white children in the Negro
school and white women, whom he knew were mill-hands, looking on. He was
black with anger; turning he galloped back to town. A few hours later
the young physician arrived hastily in a cab to take the women and
children to town. He said something in a low tone to Zora and drove
away, frowning.

Zora came quickly to the school and asked for Alwyn. He was in the barn
and she hurried there.

"Bles," she said quietly, "it is reported that a Toomsville mob will
burn the school tonight."

Bles stood motionless.

"I've been fearing it. The sheriff has been stirring up the worst
elements in the town lately and the mills pay off tonight."

"Well," she said quietly, "we must prepare."

He looked at her, his face aglow with admiration.

"You wonder-woman!" he exclaimed softly.

A moment they regarded each other. She saw the love in his eyes, and he
saw rising in hers something that made his heart bound. But she turned
quickly away.

"You must hurry, Bles; lives are at stake." And in another moment he
thundered out of the barn on the black mare.

Along the pike he flew and up the plantation roads. Across broad fields
and back again, over to the Barton pike and along the swamp. At every
cabin he whispered a word, and left behind him grey faces and whispering
children.

His horse was reeking with sweat as he staggered again into the
school-yard; but already the people were gathering, with frightened,
anxious, desperate faces. Women with bundles and children, men with
guns, tottering old folks, wide-eyed boys and girls. Up from the swamp
land came the children crying and moaning. The sun was setting. The
women and children hurried into the school building, closing the doors
and windows. A moment Alwyn stood without and looked back. The world was
peaceful. He could hear the whistle of birds and the sobbing of the
breeze in the shadowing oaks. The sky was flashing to dull and purplish
blue, and over all lay the twilight hush as though God did not care.

He threw back his head and clenched his hands. His soul groaned within
him. "Heavenly Father, was man ever before set to such a task?" Fight?
God! if he could but fight! If he could but let go the elemental
passions that were leaping and gathering and burning in the eyes of
yonder caged and desperate black men. But his hands were tied--manacled.
One desperate struggle, a whirl of blood, and the whole world would rise
to crush him and his people. The white operatore in yonder town had but
to flash the news, "Negroes killing whites," to bring all the country,
all the State, all the nation, to red vengeance. It mattered not what
the provocation, what the desperate cause.

The door suddenly opened behind him and he wheeled around.

"Zora!" he whispered.

"Bles," she answered softly, and they went silently in to their people.

All at once, from floor to roof, the whole school-house was lighted up,
save a dark window here and there. Then some one slipped out into the
darkness and soon watch-fire after watch-fire flickered and flamed in
the night, and then burned vividly, sending up sparks and black smoke.
Thus ringed with flaming silence, the school lay at the edge of the
great, black swamp and waited. Owls hooted in the forest. Afar the
shriek of the Montgomery train was heard across the night, mingling with
the wail of a wakeful babe; and then redoubled silence. The men became
restless, and Johnson began to edge away toward the lower hall. Alwyn
was watching him when a faint noise came to him on the eastern breeze--a
low, rumbling murmur. It died away, and rose again; then a distant
gun-shot woke the echoes.

"They're coming!" he cried. Standing back in the shadow of a front
window, he waited. Slowly, intermittently, the murmuring swelled, till
it grew distinguishable as yelling, cursing, and singing, intermingled
with the crash of pistol-shots. Far away a flame, as of a burning cabin,
arose, and a wilder, louder yell greeted it. Now the tramp of footsteps
could be heard, and clearer and thicker the grating and booming of
voices, until suddenly, far up the pike, a black moving mass, with
glitter and shout, swept into view. They came headlong, guided by
pine-torches, which threw their white and haggard faces into wild
distortion. Then as bonfire after bonfire met their gaze, they moved
slowly and more slowly, and at last sent a volley of bullets at the
fires. One bullet flew high and sang through a lighted window. Without a
word, Uncle Isaac sank upon the floor and lay still. Silence and renewed
murmuring ensued, and the sound of high voices in dispute. Then the mass
divided into two wings and slowly encircled the fence of fire; starting
noisily and confidently, and then going more slowly, quietly, warily, as
the silence of the flame began to tell on their heated nerves.

Strained whispers arose.

"Careful there!"

"Go on, damn ye!"

"There's some one by yon fire."

"No, there ain't."

"See the bushes move."

_Bang! bang! bang!_

"Who's that?"

"It's me."

"Let's rush through and fire the house."

"And leave a pa'cel of niggers behind to shoot your lights out? Not me."

"What the hell are you going to do?"

"I don't know yet."

"I wish I could see a nigger."

_"Hark!"_

Stealthy steps were approaching, a glint of steel flashed behind the
fire lights. Each band mistook the other for the armed Negroes, and the
leaders yelled in vain; human power can not stay the dashing torrent of
fear-inspired human panic. Whirling, the mob fled till it struck the
road in two confused, surging masses. Then in quick frenzy, shots flew;
three men threw up their hands and tumbled limply in the dust, while the
main body rushed pellmell toward town.

At early dawn, when the men relaxed from the strain of the night's
vigil, Alwyn briefly counselled them: "Hide your guns."

"Why?" blustered Rob. "Haven't I a right to have a gun?"

"Yes, you have, Rob; but don't be foolish--hide it. We've not heard the
last of this."

But Rob tossed his head belligerently.

In town, rumor spread like wildfire. A body of peaceful whites passing
through the black settlement had been fired on from ambush, and six
killed--no, three killed--no, one killed and two severely wounded.

"The thing mustn't stop here," shouted Sheriff Colton; "these niggers
must have a lesson." And before nine next morning fully half the grown
members of the same mob, now sworn in as deputies, rode with him to
search the settlement. They tramped insolently through the school
grounds, but there was no shred of evidence until they came to Rob's
cabin and found his gun. They tied his hands behind him and marched him
toward town.

But before the mob arrived the night before, Johnson feeling that his
safety lay in informing the white folks, had crawled with his gun into
the swamp. In the morning he peered out as the cavalcade approached, and
not knowing what had happened, he recognized Colton, the sheriff, and
signalled to him cautiously. In a moment a dozen men were on him, and he
appealed and explained in vain--the gun was damning evidence. The voices
of Rob's wife and children could be heard behind the two men as they
were hurried along at a dog trot.

The town poured out to greet them--"The murderers! the murderers! Kill
the niggers!" and they came on with a rush. The sheriff turned and
disappeared in the rear. There was a great cloud of dust, a cry and a
wild scramble, as the white and angry faces of men and boys gleamed a
moment and faded.

A hundred or more shots rang out; then slowly and silently, the mass of
women and men were sucked into the streets of the town, leaving but
black eddies on the corners to throw backward glances toward the bare,
towering pine where swung two red and awful things. The pale boy-face of
one, with soft brown eyes glared up sightless to the sun; the dead,
leathered bronze of the other was carved in piteous terror.




_Thirty-eight_

ATONEMENT


Three months had flown. It was Spring again, and Zora sat in the
transformed swamp--now a swamp in name only--beneath the great oak,
dreaming. And what she dreamed there in the golden day she dared not
formulate even to her own soul. She rose with a start, for there was
work to do. Aunt Rachel was ill, and Emma went daily to attend her;
today, as she came back, she brought news that Colonel Cresswell, who
had been unwell for several days, was worse. She must send Emma up to
help, and as she started toward the school she glanced toward the
Cresswell Oaks and saw the arm-chair of its master on the pillared
porch.

Colonel Cresswell sat in his chair on the porch, alone. As far as he
could see, there was no human soul. His eyes were blood-shot, his cheeks
sunken, and his breath came in painful gasps. A sort of terror shook
him until he heard the distant songs of black folk in the fields. He
sighed, and lying back, closed his eyes and the breath came easier. When
he opened them again a white figure was coming up the avenue of the
Oaks. He watched it greedily. It was Mary Cresswell, and she started
when she saw him.

"You are worse, father?" she asked.

"Worse and better," he replied, smiling cynically. Then suddenly he
announced: "I've made my will."

"Why--why--" she stammered.

"Why?" sharply. "Because I'm going to die."

She said nothing. He smiled and continued:

"I've got it all fixed. Harry was in a tight place--gambling as
usual--and I gave him a lump sum in lieu of all claims. Then I gave John
Taylor--you needn't look. I sent for him. He's a damned scoundrel; but
he won't lie, and I needed him. I willed his children all the rest
except two or three legacies. One was one hundred thousand dollars for
you--"

"Oh, father!" she cried. "I don't deserve it."

"I reckon two years with Harry was worth about that much," he returned
grimly. "Then there's another gift of two hundred thousand dollars and
this house and plantation. Whom do you think that's for?"

"Helen?"

"Helen!" he raised his hand in threatening anger. "I might rot here for
all she cares. No--no--but then--I'll not tell you--I--ah--" A spasm of
pain shot across his face, and he lay back white and still. Abruptly he
sat up again and peered down the oaks. "Hush!" he gasped. "Who's that?"

"I don't know--it's a girl--I--"

He gripped her till she winced.

"My God--it walks--like my wife--I tell you--she held her head so--who
is it?" He half rose.

"Oh, father, it's nobody but Emma--little Emma--Bertie's child--the
mulatto girl. She's a nurse now, and I asked to have her come and attend
you."

"Oh," he said, "oh--" He looked at the girl curiously. "Come here." He
peered into her white young face. "Do you know me?"

The girl shrank away from him.

"Yes, sir."

"What do you do?"

"I teach and nurse at the school."

"Good! Well, I'm going to give you some money--do you know why?"

A flash of self-consciousness passed over the girl's face; she looked at
him with her wide blue eyes.

"Yes, Grandfather," she faltered.

Mrs. Cresswell rose to her feet; but the old man slowly dropped the
girl's hand and lay back in his chair, with lips half smiling.
"Grandfather," he repeated softly. He closed his eyes a space and then
opened them. A tremor shivered in his limbs as he stared darkly at the
swamp.

"Hark!" he cried harshly. "Do you hear the bodies creaking on the limbs?
It's Rob and Johnson. I did it--I--"

Suddenly he rose and stood erect and his wild eyes stricken with death
stared full upon Emma. Slowly and thickly he spoke, working his
trembling hands.

"Nell--Nell! Is it you, little wife, come back to accuse me? Ah, Nell,
don't shrink! I know--I have sinned against the light and the blood of
your poor black people is red on these old hands. No, don't put your
clean white hands upon me, Nell, till I wash mine. I'll do it, Nell;
I'll atone. I'm a Cresswell yet, Nell, a Cresswell and a gen--" He
swayed. Vainly he struggled for the word. The shudder of death shook his
soul, and he passed.

A week after the funeral of Colonel Cresswell, John Taylor drove out to
the school and was closeted with Miss Smith. His sister, installed once
again for a few days in her old room at the school, understood that he
was conferring about Emma's legacy, and she was glad. She was more and
more convinced that the marriage of Emma and Bles was the best possible
solution of many difficulties. She had asked Emma once if she liked
Bles, and Emma had replied in her innocent way,

"Oh, so much."

As for Bles, he was often saying what a dear child Emma was. Neither
perhaps realized yet that this was love, but it needed, Mrs. Cresswell
was sure, only the lightning-flash, and they would know. And who could
furnish that illumination better than Zora, the calm, methodical Zora,
who knew them so well?

As for herself, once she had accomplished the marriage and paid the
mortgage on the school out of her legacy, she would go abroad and in
travel seek forgetfulness and healing. There had been no formal divorce,
and so far as she was concerned there never would be; but the separation
from her husband and America would be forever.

Her brother came out of the office, nodded casually, for they had little
intercourse these days, and rode away. She rushed in to Miss Smith and
found her sitting there--straight, upright, composed in all save that
the tears were streaming down her face and she was making no effort to
stop them.

"Why--Miss Smith!" she faltered.

Miss Smith pointed to a paper. Mrs. Cresswell picked it up curiously. It
was an official notification to the trustees of the Smith School of a
legacy of two hundred thousand dollars together with the Cresswell house
and plantation. Mrs. Gresswell sat down in open-mouthed astonishment.
Twice she tried to speak, but there were so many things to say that she
could not choose.

"Tell Zora," Miss Smith at last managed to say.

Zora was dreaming again. Somehow, the old dream-life, with its glorious
phantasies, had come silently back, richer and sweeter than ever. There
was no tangible reason why, and yet today she had shut herself in her
den. Searching down in the depths of her trunk, she drew forth that
filmy cloud of white--silk-bordered and half finished to a gown. Why
were her eyes wet today and her mind on the Silver Fleece? It was an
anniversary, and perhaps she still remembered that moment, that supreme
moment before the mob. She half slipped on, half wound about her, the
white cloud of cloth, standing with parted lips, looking into the long
mirror and gleaming in the fading day like midnight gowned in mists and
stars. Abruptly there came a peremptory knocking at the door.

"Zora! Zora!" sounded Mrs. Cresswell's voice. Forgetting her informal
attire, she opened the door, fearing some mishap. Mrs. Cresswell poured
out the news. Zora received it in such motionless silence that Mary
wondered at her want of feeling. At last, however, she said happily to
Zora:

"Well, the battle's over, isn't it?"

"No, it's just begun."

"Just begun?" echoed Mary in amazement.

"Think of the servile black folk, the half awakened restless whites, the
fat land waiting for the harvest, the masses panting to know--why, the
battle is scarcely even begun."

"Yes, I guess that's so," Mary began to comprehend. "We'll thank God it
has begun, though."

"Thank God!" Zora reverently repeated.

"Come, let's go back to poor, dear Miss Smith," suggested Mary.

"I can't come just now--but pretty soon."

"Why? Oh, I see; you're trying on something--how pretty and becoming!
Well, hurry."

As they stood together, the white woman deemed the moment opportune; she
slipped her arm about the black woman's waist and began:

"Zora, I've had something on my mind for a long time, and I shouldn't
wonder if you had thought of the same thing."

"What is it?"

"Bles and Emma."

"What of them?"

"Their liking for each other."

Zora bent a moment and caught up the folds of the Fleece.

"I hadn't noticed it," she said in a low voice.

"Well, you're busy, you see. They've been very much together--his taking
her to her charges, bringing her back, and all that. I know they love
each other; yet something holds them apart, afraid to show their love.
Do you know--I've wondered if--quite unconciously, it is you? You know
Bles used to imagine himself in love with you, just as he did afterward
with Miss Wynn."

"Miss--Wynn?"

"Yes, the Washington girl. But he got over that and you straightened him
out finally. Still, Emma probably thinks yours is the prior claim,
knowing, of course, nothing of facts. And Bles knows she thinks of him
and you, and I'm convinced if you say the word, they'd love and marry."

Zora walked silently with her to the door, where, looking out, she saw
Bles and Emma coming from Aunt Rachel's. He was helping her from the
carriage with smiling eyes, and her innocent blue eyes were fastened on
him.

Zora looked long and searchingly.

"Please run and tell them of the legacy," she begged. "I--I will
come--in a moment." And Mrs. Cresswell hurried out.

Zora turned back steadily to her room, and locked herself in. After all,
why shouldn't it be? Why had it not occurred to her before in her
blindness? If she had wanted him--and ah, God! was not all her life
simply the want of him?--why had she not bound him to her when he had
offered himself? Why had she not bound him to her? She knew as she
asked--because she had wanted all, not a part--everything, love, respect
and perfect faith--not one thing could she spare then--not one thing.
And now, oh, God! she had dreamed that it was all hers, since that night
of death and circling flame when they looked at each other soul to soul.
But he had not meant anything. It was pity she had seen there, not love;
and she rose and walked the room slowly, fast and faster.

With trembling hands she drew the Silver Fleece round her. Her head swam
again and the blood flashed in her eyes. She heard a calling in the
swamp, and the shadow of Elspeth seemed to hover over her, claiming her
for her own, dragging her down, down.... She rushed through the swamp.
The lagoon lay there before her presently, gleaming in the
darkness--cold and still, and in it swam an awful shape.

She held her burning head--was not everything plain? Was not everything
clear? This was Sacrifice! This was the Atonement for the unforgiven
sin. Emma's was the pure soul which she must offer up to God; for it was
God, a cold and mighty God, who had given it to Bles--her Bles. It was
well; God willed it. But could she live? Must she live? Did God ask
that, too?

All at once she stood straight; her whole body grew tense, alert. She
heard no sound behind her, but knew he was there, and braced herself.
She must be true. She must be just. She must pay the uttermost farthing.

"Bles," she called faintly, but did not turn her head.

"Zora!"

"Bles," she choked, but her voice came stronger, "I know--all. Emma is a
good girl. I helped bring her up myself and did all I could for her and
she--she is pure; marry her."

His voice came slow and firm:

"Emma? But I don't love Emma. I love--some one else."

Her heart bounded and again was still. It was that Washington girl then.
She answered dully, groping for words, for she was tired:

"Who is it?"

"The best woman in all the world, Zora."

"And is"--she struggled at the word madly--"is she pure?"

"She is more than pure."

"Then you must marry her, Bles."

"I am not worthy of her," he answered, sinking before her.

Then at last illumination dawned upon her blindness. She stood very
still and lifted up her eyes. The swamp was living, vibrant, tremulous.
There where the first long note of night lay shot with burning crimson,
burst in sudden radiance the wide beauty of the moon. There pulsed a
glory in the air. Her little hands groped and wandered over his
close-curled hair, and she sobbed, deep voiced:

"Will you--marry me, Bles?"


                              L'ENVOI

     Lend me thine ears, O God the Reader, whose Fathers aforetime sent
     mine down into the land of Egypt, into this House of Bondage. Lay
     not these words aside for a moment's phantasy, but lift up thine
     eyes upon the Horror in this land;--the maiming and mocking and
     murdering of my people, and the prisonment of their souls. Let my
     people go, O Infinite One, lest the world shudder at


The Souls of Black Folk

To Burghardt and Yolande

The Lost and the Found


The Forethought

Herein lie buried many things which if read with patience may show the
strange meaning of being black here at the dawning of the Twentieth
Century.  This meaning is not without interest to you, Gentle Reader;
for the problem of the Twentieth Century is the problem of the color
line.  I pray you, then, receive my little book in all charity,
studying my words with me, forgiving mistake and foible for sake of the
faith and passion that is in me, and seeking the grain of truth hidden
there.

I have sought here to sketch, in vague, uncertain outline, the
spiritual world in which ten thousand thousand Americans live and
strive.  First, in two chapters I have tried to show what Emancipation
meant to them, and what was its aftermath.  In a third chapter I have
pointed out the slow rise of personal leadership, and criticized
candidly the leader who bears the chief burden of his race to-day.
Then, in two other chapters I have sketched in swift outline the two
worlds within and without the Veil, and thus have come to the central
problem of training men for life.  Venturing now into deeper detail, I
have in two chapters studied the struggles of the massed millions of
the black peasantry, and in another have sought to make clear the
present relations of the sons of master and man.  Leaving, then, the
white world, I have stepped within the Veil, raising it that you may
view faintly its deeper recesses,--the meaning of its religion, the
passion of its human sorrow, and the struggle of its greater souls.
All this I have ended with a tale twice told but seldom written, and a
chapter of song.

Some of these thoughts of mine have seen the light before in other
guise.  For kindly consenting to their republication here, in altered
and extended form, I must thank the publishers of the Atlantic Monthly,
The World's Work, the Dial, The New World, and the Annals of the
American Academy of Political and Social Science.  Before each chapter,
as now printed, stands a bar of the Sorrow Songs,--some echo of
haunting melody from the only American music which welled up from black
souls in the dark past.  And, finally, need I add that I who speak here
am bone of the bone and flesh of the flesh of them that live within the
Veil?

W.E.B Du B.

ATLANTA, GA., FEB. 1, 1903.




I

Of Our Spiritual Strivings

  O water, voice of my heart, crying in the sand,
    All night long crying with a mournful cry,
  As I lie and listen, and cannot understand
      The voice of my heart in my side or the voice of the sea,
    O water, crying for rest, is it I, is it I?
      All night long the water is crying to me.

  Unresting water, there shall never be rest
    Till the last moon droop and the last tide fail,
  And the fire of the end begin to burn in the west;
      And the heart shall be weary and wonder and cry like the sea,
    All life long crying without avail,
      As the water all night long is crying to me.

  ARTHUR SYMONS.


Between me and the other world there is ever an unasked question:
unasked by some through feelings of delicacy; by others through the
difficulty of rightly framing it.  All, nevertheless, flutter round it.
They approach me in a half-hesitant sort of way, eye me curiously or
compassionately, and then, instead of saying directly, How does it feel
to be a problem?  they say, I know an excellent colored man in my town;
or, I fought at Mechanicsville; or, Do not these Southern outrages make
your blood boil?  At these I smile, or am interested, or reduce the
boiling to a simmer, as the occasion may require.  To the real
question, How does it feel to be a problem?  I answer seldom a word.

And yet, being a problem is a strange experience,--peculiar even for
one who has never been anything else, save perhaps in babyhood and in
Europe.  It is in the early days of rollicking boyhood that the
revelation first bursts upon one, all in a day, as it were.  I remember
well when the shadow swept across me. I was a little thing, away up in
the hills of New England, where the dark Housatonic winds between
Hoosac and Taghkanic to the sea.  In a wee wooden schoolhouse,
something put it into the boys' and girls' heads to buy gorgeous
visiting-cards--ten cents a package--and exchange.  The exchange was
merry, till one girl, a tall newcomer, refused my card,--refused it
peremptorily, with a glance.  Then it dawned upon me with a certain
suddenness that I was different from the others; or like, mayhap, in
heart and life and longing, but shut out from their world by a vast
veil.  I had thereafter no desire to tear down that veil, to creep
through; I held all beyond it in common contempt, and lived above it in
a region of blue sky and great wandering shadows.  That sky was bluest
when I could beat my mates at examination-time, or beat them at a
foot-race, or even beat their stringy heads.  Alas, with the years all
this fine contempt began to fade; for the words I longed for, and all
their dazzling opportunities, were theirs, not mine.  But they should
not keep these prizes, I said; some, all, I would wrest from them.
Just how I would do it I could never decide: by reading law, by healing
the sick, by telling the wonderful tales that swam in my head,--some
way.  With other black boys the strife was not so fiercely sunny: their
youth shrunk into tasteless sycophancy, or into silent hatred of the
pale world about them and mocking distrust of everything white; or
wasted itself in a bitter cry, Why did God make me an outcast and a
stranger in mine own house?  The shades of the prison-house closed
round about us all: walls strait and stubborn to the whitest, but
relentlessly narrow, tall, and unscalable to sons of night who must
plod darkly on in resignation, or beat unavailing palms against the
stone, or steadily, half hopelessly, watch the streak of blue above.

After the Egyptian and Indian, the Greek and Roman, the Teuton and
Mongolian, the Negro is a sort of seventh son, born with a veil, and
gifted with second-sight in this American world,--a world which yields
him no true self-consciousness, but only lets him see himself through
the revelation of the other world.  It is a peculiar sensation, this
double-consciousness, this sense of always looking at one's self
through the eyes of others, of measuring one's soul by the tape of a
world that looks on in amused contempt and pity.  One ever feels his
twoness,--an American, a Negro; two souls, two thoughts, two
unreconciled strivings; two warring ideals in one dark body, whose
dogged strength alone keeps it from being torn asunder.

The history of the American Negro is the history of this strife,--this
longing to attain self-conscious manhood, to merge his double self into
a better and truer self.  In this merging he wishes neither of the
older selves to be lost.  He would not Africanize America, for America
has too much to teach the world and Africa.  He would not bleach his
Negro soul in a flood of white Americanism, for he knows that Negro
blood has a message for the world.  He simply wishes to make it
possible for a man to be both a Negro and an American, without being
cursed and spit upon by his fellows, without having the doors of
Opportunity closed roughly in his face.

This, then, is the end of his striving: to be a co-worker in the
kingdom of culture, to escape both death and isolation, to husband and
use his best powers and his latent genius.  These powers of body and
mind have in the past been strangely wasted, dispersed, or forgotten.
The shadow of a mighty Negro past flits through the tale of Ethiopia
the Shadowy and of Egypt the Sphinx.  Through history, the powers of
single black men flash here and there like falling stars, and die
sometimes before the world has rightly gauged their brightness.  Here
in America, in the few days since Emancipation, the black man's turning
hither and thither in hesitant and doubtful striving has often made his
very strength to lose effectiveness, to seem like absence of power,
like weakness.  And yet it is not weakness,--it is the contradiction of
double aims.  The double-aimed struggle of the black artisan--on the
one hand to escape white contempt for a nation of  mere hewers of wood
and drawers of water, and on the other hand to plough and nail and dig
for a poverty-stricken horde--could only result in making him a poor
craftsman, for he had but half a heart in either cause.  By the poverty
and ignorance of his people, the Negro minister or doctor was tempted
toward quackery and demagogy; and by the criticism of the other world,
toward ideals that made him ashamed of his lowly tasks.  The would-be
black savant was confronted by the paradox that the knowledge his
people needed was a twice-told tale to his white neighbors, while the
knowledge which would teach the white world was Greek to his own flesh
and blood.  The innate love of harmony and beauty that set the ruder
souls of his people a-dancing and a-singing raised but confusion and
doubt in the soul of the black artist; for the beauty revealed to him
was the soul-beauty of a race which his larger audience despised, and
he could not articulate the message of another people.  This waste of
double aims, this seeking to satisfy two unreconciled ideals, has
wrought sad havoc with the courage and faith and deeds of ten thousand
thousand people,--has sent them often wooing false gods and invoking
false means of salvation, and at times has even seemed about to make
them ashamed of themselves.

Away back in the days of bondage they thought to see in one divine
event the end of all doubt and disappointment; few men ever worshipped
Freedom with half such unquestioning faith as did the American Negro
for two centuries.  To him, so far as he thought and dreamed, slavery
was indeed the sum of all villainies, the cause of all sorrow, the root
of all prejudice; Emancipation was the key to a promised land of
sweeter beauty than ever stretched before the eyes of wearied
Israelites.  In song and exhortation swelled one refrain--Liberty; in
his tears and curses the God he implored had Freedom in his right hand.
At last it came,--suddenly, fearfully, like a dream.  With one wild
carnival of blood and passion came the message in his own plaintive
cadences:--

  "Shout, O children!
  Shout, you're free!
  For God has bought your liberty!"


Years have passed away since then,--ten, twenty, forty; forty years of
national life, forty years of renewal and development, and yet the
swarthy spectre sits in its accustomed seat at the Nation's feast.  In
vain do we cry to this our vastest social problem:--

  "Take any shape but that, and my firm nerves
  Shall never tremble!"


The Nation has not yet found peace from its sins; the freedman has not
yet found in freedom his promised land.  Whatever of good may have come
in these years of change, the shadow of a deep disappointment rests
upon the Negro people,--a disappointment all the more bitter because
the unattained ideal was unbounded save by the simple ignorance of a
lowly people.

The first decade was merely a prolongation of the vain search for
freedom, the boon that seemed ever barely to elude their grasp,--like a
tantalizing will-o'-the-wisp, maddening and misleading the headless
host.  The holocaust of war, the terrors of the Ku-Klux Klan, the lies
of carpet-baggers, the disorganization of industry, and the
contradictory advice of friends and foes, left the bewildered serf with
no new watchword beyond the old cry for freedom.  As the time flew,
however, he began to grasp a new idea.  The ideal of liberty demanded
for its attainment powerful means, and these the Fifteenth Amendment
gave him.  The ballot, which before he had looked upon as a visible
sign of freedom, he now regarded as the chief means of gaining and
perfecting the liberty with which war had partially endowed him.  And
why not?  Had not votes made war and emancipated millions?  Had not
votes enfranchised the freedmen?  Was anything impossible to a power
that had done all this?  A million black men started with renewed zeal
to vote themselves into the kingdom.  So the decade flew away, the
revolution of 1876 came, and left the half-free serf weary, wondering,
but still inspired.  Slowly but steadily, in the following years, a new
vision began gradually to replace the dream of political power,--a
powerful movement, the rise of another ideal to guide the unguided,
another pillar of fire by night after a clouded day.  It was the ideal
of "book-learning"; the curiosity, born of compulsory ignorance, to
know and test the power of the cabalistic letters of the white man, the
longing to know.  Here at last seemed to have been discovered the
mountain path to Canaan; longer than the highway of Emancipation and
law, steep and rugged, but straight, leading to heights high enough to
overlook life.

Up the new path the advance guard toiled, slowly, heavily, doggedly;
only those who have watched and guided the faltering feet, the misty
minds, the dull understandings, of the dark pupils of these schools
know how faithfully, how piteously, this people strove to learn.  It
was weary work.  The cold statistician wrote down the inches of
progress here and there, noted also where here and there a foot had
slipped or some one had fallen.  To the tired climbers, the horizon was
ever dark, the mists were often cold, the Canaan was always dim and far
away.  If, however, the vistas disclosed as yet no goal, no
resting-place, little but flattery and criticism, the journey at least
gave leisure for reflection and self-examination; it changed the child
of Emancipation to the youth with dawning self-consciousness,
self-realization, self-respect.  In those sombre forests of his
striving his own soul rose before him, and he saw himself,--darkly as
through a veil; and yet he saw in himself some faint revelation of his
power, of his mission.  He began to have a dim feeling that, to attain
his place in the world, he must be himself, and not another.  For the
first time he sought to analyze the burden he bore upon his back, that
dead-weight of social degradation partially masked behind a half-named
Negro problem.  He felt his poverty; without a cent, without a home,
without land, tools, or savings, he had entered into competition with
rich, landed, skilled neighbors.  To be a poor man is hard, but to be a
poor race in a land of dollars is the very bottom of hardships.  He
felt the weight of his ignorance,--not simply of letters, but of life,
of business, of the humanities; the accumulated sloth and shirking and
awkwardness of decades and centuries shackled his hands and feet.  Nor
was his burden all poverty and ignorance.  The red stain of bastardy,
which two centuries of systematic legal defilement of Negro women had
stamped upon his race, meant not only the loss of ancient African
chastity, but also the hereditary weight of a mass of corruption from
white adulterers, threatening almost the obliteration of the Negro home.

A people thus handicapped ought not to be asked to race with the world,
but rather allowed to give all its time and thought to its own social
problems.  But alas! while sociologists gleefully count his bastards
and his prostitutes, the very soul of the toiling, sweating black man
is darkened by the shadow of a vast despair.  Men call the shadow
prejudice, and learnedly explain it as the natural defence of culture
against barbarism, learning against ignorance, purity against crime,
the "higher" against the "lower" races.  To which the Negro cries Amen!
and swears that to so much of this strange prejudice as is founded on
just homage to civilization, culture, righteousness, and progress, he
humbly bows and meekly does obeisance.  But before that nameless
prejudice that leaps beyond all this he stands helpless, dismayed, and
well-nigh speechless; before that personal disrespect and mockery, the
ridicule and systematic humiliation, the distortion of fact and wanton
license of fancy, the cynical ignoring of the better and the boisterous
welcoming of the worse, the all-pervading desire to inculcate disdain
for everything black, from Toussaint to the devil,--before this there
rises a sickening despair that would disarm and discourage any nation
save that black host to whom "discouragement" is an unwritten word.

But the facing of so vast a prejudice could not but bring the
inevitable self-questioning, self-disparagement, and lowering of ideals
which ever accompany repression and breed in an atmosphere of contempt
and hate.  Whisperings and portents came home upon the four winds: Lo!
we are diseased and dying, cried the dark hosts; we cannot write, our
voting is vain; what need of education, since we must always cook and
serve?  And the Nation echoed and enforced this self-criticism, saying:
Be content to be servants, and nothing more; what need of higher
culture for half-men?  Away with the black man's ballot, by force or
fraud,--and behold the suicide of a race!  Nevertheless, out of the
evil came something of good,--the more careful adjustment of education
to real life, the clearer perception of the Negroes' social
responsibilities, and the sobering realization of the meaning of
progress.

So dawned the time of Sturm und Drang: storm and stress to-day rocks
our little boat on the mad waters of the world-sea; there is within and
without the sound of conflict, the burning of body and rending of soul;
inspiration strives with doubt, and faith with vain questionings.  The
bright ideals of the past,--physical freedom, political power, the
training of brains and the training of hands,--all these in turn have
waxed and waned, until even the last grows dim and overcast.  Are they
all wrong,--all false?  No, not that, but each alone was over-simple
and incomplete,--the dreams of a credulous race-childhood, or the fond
imaginings of the other world which does not know and does not want to
know our power.  To be really true, all these ideals must be melted and
welded into one.  The training of the schools we need to-day more than
ever,--the training of deft hands, quick eyes and ears, and above all
the broader, deeper, higher culture of gifted minds and pure hearts.
The power of the ballot we need in sheer self-defence,--else what shall
save us from a second slavery?  Freedom, too, the long-sought, we still
seek,--the freedom of life and limb, the freedom to work and think, the
freedom to love and aspire.  Work, culture, liberty,--all these we
need, not singly but together, not successively but together, each
growing and aiding each, and all striving toward that vaster ideal that
swims before the Negro people, the ideal of human brotherhood, gained
through the unifying ideal of Race; the ideal of fostering and
developing the traits and talents of the Negro, not in opposition to or
contempt for other races, but rather in large conformity to the greater
ideals of the American Republic, in order that some day on American
soil two world-races may give each to each those characteristics both
so sadly lack.  We the darker ones come even now not altogether
empty-handed: there are to-day no truer exponents of the pure human
spirit of the Declaration of Independence than the American Negroes;
there is no true American music but the wild sweet melodies of the
Negro slave; the American fairy tales and folklore are Indian and
African; and, all in all, we black men seem the sole oasis of simple
faith and reverence in a dusty desert of dollars and smartness.  Will
America be poorer if she replace her brutal dyspeptic blundering with
light-hearted but determined Negro humility? or her coarse and cruel
wit with loving jovial good-humor? or her vulgar music with the soul of
the Sorrow Songs?

Merely a concrete test of the underlying principles of the great
republic is the Negro Problem, and the spiritual striving of the
freedmen's sons is the travail of souls whose burden is almost beyond
the measure of their strength, but who bear it in the name of an
historic race, in the name of this the land of their fathers' fathers,
and in the name of human opportunity.


And now what I have briefly sketched in large outline let me on coming
pages tell again in many ways, with loving emphasis and deeper detail,
that men may listen to the striving in the souls of black folk.




II

Of the Dawn of Freedom

  Careless seems the great Avenger;
    History's lessons but record
  One death-grapple in the darkness
    'Twixt old systems and the Word;
  Truth forever on the scaffold,
    Wrong forever on the throne;
  Yet that scaffold sways the future,
    And behind the dim unknown
  Standeth God within the shadow
    Keeping watch above His own.

  LOWELL.


The problem of the twentieth century is the problem of the
color-line,--the relation of the darker to the lighter races of men in
Asia and Africa, in America and the islands of the sea.  It was a phase
of this problem that caused the Civil War; and however much they who
marched South and North in 1861 may have fixed on the technical points,
of union and local autonomy as a shibboleth, all nevertheless knew, as
we know, that the question of Negro slavery was the real cause of the
conflict.  Curious it was, too, how this deeper question ever forced
itself to the surface despite effort and disclaimer.  No sooner had
Northern armies touched Southern soil than this old question, newly
guised, sprang from the earth,--What shall be done with Negroes?
Peremptory military commands this way and that, could not answer the
query; the Emancipation Proclamation seemed but to broaden and
intensify the difficulties; and the War Amendments made the Negro
problems of to-day.

It is the aim of this essay to study the period of history from 1861 to
1872 so far as it relates to the American Negro.  In effect, this tale
of the dawn of Freedom is an account of that government of men called
the Freedmen's Bureau,--one of the most singular and interesting of the
attempts made by a great nation to grapple with vast problems of race
and social condition.

The war has naught to do with slaves, cried Congress, the President,
and the Nation; and yet no sooner had the armies, East and West,
penetrated Virginia and Tennessee than fugitive slaves appeared within
their lines.  They came at night, when the flickering camp-fires shone
like vast unsteady stars along the black horizon: old men and thin,
with gray and tufted hair; women with frightened eyes, dragging
whimpering hungry children; men and girls, stalwart and gaunt,--a horde
of starving vagabonds, homeless, helpless, and pitiable, in their dark
distress.  Two methods of treating these newcomers seemed equally
logical to opposite sorts of minds.  Ben Butler, in Virginia, quickly
declared slave property contraband of war, and put the fugitives to
work; while Fremont, in Missouri, declared the slaves free under
martial law.  Butler's action was approved, but Fremont's was hastily
countermanded, and his successor, Halleck, saw things differently.
"Hereafter," he commanded, "no slaves should be allowed to come into
your lines at all; if any come without your knowledge, when owners call
for them deliver them."  Such a policy was difficult to enforce; some
of the black refugees declared themselves freemen, others showed that
their masters had deserted them, and still others were captured with
forts and plantations.  Evidently, too, slaves were a source of
strength to the Confederacy, and were being used as laborers and
producers.  "They constitute a military resource," wrote Secretary
Cameron, late in 1861; "and being such, that they should not be turned
over to the enemy is too plain to discuss."  So gradually the tone of
the army chiefs changed; Congress forbade the rendition of fugitives,
and Butler's "contrabands" were welcomed as military laborers.  This
complicated rather than solved the problem, for now the scattering
fugitives became a steady stream, which flowed faster as the armies
marched.

Then the long-headed man with care-chiselled face who sat in the White
House saw the inevitable, and emancipated the slaves of rebels on New
Year's, 1863.  A month later Congress called earnestly for the Negro
soldiers whom the act of July, 1862, had half grudgingly allowed to
enlist.  Thus the barriers were levelled and the deed was done.  The
stream of fugitives swelled to a flood, and anxious army officers kept
inquiring: "What must be done with slaves, arriving almost daily?  Are
we to find food and shelter for women and children?"

It was a Pierce of Boston who pointed out the way, and thus became in a
sense the founder of the Freedmen's Bureau.  He was a firm friend of
Secretary Chase; and when, in 1861, the care of slaves and abandoned
lands devolved upon the Treasury officials, Pierce was specially
detailed from the ranks to study the conditions.  First, he cared for
the refugees at Fortress Monroe; and then, after Sherman had captured
Hilton Head, Pierce was sent there to found his Port Royal experiment
of making free workingmen out of slaves.  Before his experiment was
barely started, however, the problem of the fugitives had assumed such
proportions that it was taken from the hands of the over-burdened
Treasury Department and given to the army officials.  Already centres
of massed freedmen were forming at Fortress Monroe, Washington, New
Orleans, Vicksburg and Corinth, Columbus, Ky., and Cairo, Ill., as well
as at Port Royal.  Army chaplains found here new and fruitful fields;
"superintendents of contrabands" multiplied, and some attempt at
systematic work was made by enlisting the able-bodied men and giving
work to the others.

Then came the Freedmen's Aid societies, born of the touching appeals
from Pierce and from these other centres of distress.  There was the
American Missionary Association, sprung from the Amistad, and now
full-grown for work; the various church organizations, the National
Freedmen's Relief Association, the American Freedmen's Union, the
Western Freedmen's Aid Commission,--in all fifty or more active
organizations, which sent clothes, money, school-books, and teachers
southward.  All they did was needed, for the destitution of the
freedmen was often reported as "too appalling for belief," and the
situation was daily growing worse rather than better.

And daily, too, it seemed more plain that this was no ordinary matter
of temporary relief, but a national crisis; for here loomed a labor
problem of vast dimensions.  Masses of Negroes stood idle, or, if they
worked spasmodically, were never sure of pay; and if perchance they
received pay, squandered the new thing thoughtlessly.  In these and
other ways were camp-life and the new liberty demoralizing the
freedmen.  The broader economic organization thus clearly demanded
sprang up here and there as accident and local conditions determined.
Here it was that Pierce's Port Royal plan of leased plantations and
guided workmen pointed out the rough way.  In Washington the military
governor, at the urgent appeal of the superintendent, opened
confiscated estates to the cultivation of the fugitives, and there in
the shadow of the dome gathered black farm villages.  General Dix gave
over estates to the freedmen of Fortress Monroe, and so on, South and
West.  The government and benevolent societies furnished the means of
cultivation, and the Negro turned again slowly to work.  The systems of
control, thus started, rapidly grew, here and there, into strange
little governments, like that of General Banks in Louisiana, with its
ninety thousand black subjects, its fifty thousand guided laborers, and
its annual budget of one hundred thousand dollars and more.  It made
out four thousand pay-rolls a year, registered all freedmen, inquired
into grievances and redressed them, laid and collected taxes, and
established a system of public schools.  So, too, Colonel Eaton, the
superintendent of Tennessee and Arkansas, ruled over one hundred
thousand freedmen, leased and cultivated seven thousand acres of cotton
land, and fed ten thousand paupers a year.  In South Carolina was
General Saxton, with his deep interest in black folk.  He succeeded
Pierce and the Treasury officials, and sold forfeited estates, leased
abandoned plantations, encouraged schools, and received from Sherman,
after that terribly picturesque march to the sea, thousands of the
wretched camp followers.

Three characteristic things one might have seen in Sherman's raid
through Georgia, which threw the new situation in shadowy relief: the
Conqueror, the Conquered, and the Negro.  Some see all significance in
the grim front of the destroyer, and some in the bitter sufferers of
the Lost Cause.  But to me neither soldier nor fugitive speaks with so
deep a meaning as that dark human cloud that clung like remorse on the
rear of those swift columns, swelling at times to half their size,
almost engulfing and choking them.  In vain were they ordered back, in
vain were bridges hewn from beneath their feet; on they trudged and
writhed and surged, until they rolled into Savannah, a starved and
naked horde of tens of thousands.  There too came the characteristic
military remedy: "The islands from Charleston south, the abandoned
rice-fields along the rivers for thirty miles back from the sea, and
the country bordering the St. John's River, Florida, are reserved and
set apart for the settlement of Negroes now made free by act of war."
So read the celebrated "Field-order Number Fifteen."

All these experiments, orders, and systems were bound to attract and
perplex the government and the nation.  Directly after the Emancipation
Proclamation, Representative Eliot had introduced a bill creating a
Bureau of Emancipation; but it was never reported.  The following June
a committee of inquiry, appointed by the Secretary of War, reported in
favor of a temporary bureau for the "improvement, protection, and
employment of refugee freedmen," on much the same lines as were
afterwards followed.  Petitions came in to President Lincoln from
distinguished citizens and organizations, strongly urging a
comprehensive and unified plan of dealing with the freedmen, under a
bureau which should be "charged with the study of plans and execution
of measures for easily guiding, and in every way judiciously and
humanely aiding, the passage of our emancipated and yet to be
emancipated blacks from the old condition of forced labor to their new
state of voluntary industry."

Some half-hearted steps were taken to accomplish this, in part, by
putting the whole matter again in charge of the special Treasury
agents.  Laws of 1863 and 1864 directed them to take charge of and
lease abandoned lands for periods not exceeding twelve months, and to
"provide in such leases, or otherwise, for the employment and general
welfare" of the freedmen.  Most of the army officers greeted this as a
welcome relief from perplexing "Negro affairs," and Secretary
Fessenden, July 29, 1864, issued an excellent system of regulations,
which were afterward closely followed by General Howard.  Under
Treasury agents, large quantities of land were leased in the
Mississippi Valley, and many Negroes were employed; but in August,
1864, the new regulations were suspended for reasons of "public
policy," and the army was again in control.

Meanwhile Congress had turned its attention to the subject; and in
March the House passed a bill by a majority of two establishing a
Bureau for Freedmen in the War Department.  Charles Sumner, who had
charge of the bill in the Senate, argued that freedmen and abandoned
lands ought to be under the same department, and reported a substitute
for the House bill attaching the Bureau to the Treasury Department.
This bill passed, but too late for action by the House.  The debates
wandered over the whole policy of the administration and the general
question of slavery, without touching very closely the specific merits
of the measure in hand.  Then the national election took place; and the
administration, with a vote of renewed confidence from the country,
addressed itself to the matter more seriously.  A conference between
the two branches of Congress agreed upon a carefully drawn measure
which contained the chief provisions of Sumner's bill, but made the
proposed organization a department independent of both the War and the
Treasury officials.  The bill was conservative, giving the new
department "general superintendence of all freedmen."  Its purpose was
to "establish regulations" for them, protect them, lease them lands,
adjust their wages, and appear in civil and military courts as their
"next friend." There were many limitations attached to the powers thus
granted, and the organization was made permanent.  Nevertheless, the
Senate defeated the bill, and a new conference committee was appointed.
This committee reported a new bill, February 28, which was whirled
through just as the session closed, and became the act of 1865
establishing in the War Department a "Bureau of Refugees, Freedmen, and
Abandoned Lands."

This last compromise was a hasty bit of legislation, vague and
uncertain in outline.  A Bureau was created, "to continue during the
present War of Rebellion, and for one year thereafter," to which was
given "the supervision and management of all abandoned lands and the
control of all subjects relating to refugees and freedmen," under "such
rules and regulations as may be presented by the head of the Bureau and
approved by the President."  A Commissioner, appointed by the President
and Senate, was to control the Bureau, with an office force not
exceeding ten clerks.  The President might also appoint assistant
commissioners in the seceded States, and to all these offices military
officials might be detailed at regular pay.  The Secretary of War could
issue rations, clothing, and fuel to the destitute, and all abandoned
property was placed in the hands of the Bureau for eventual lease and
sale to ex-slaves in forty-acre parcels.

Thus did the United States government definitely assume charge of the
emancipated Negro as the ward of the nation.  It was a tremendous
undertaking.  Here at a stroke of the pen was erected a government of
millions of men,--and not ordinary men either, but black men
emasculated by a peculiarly complete system of slavery, centuries old;
and now, suddenly, violently, they come into a new birthright, at a
time of war and passion, in the midst of the stricken and embittered
population of their former masters.  Any man might well have hesitated
to assume charge of such a work, with vast responsibilities, indefinite
powers, and limited resources.  Probably no one but a soldier would
have answered such a call promptly; and, indeed, no one but a soldier
could be called, for Congress had appropriated no money for salaries
and expenses.

Less than a month after the weary Emancipator passed to his rest, his
successor assigned Major-Gen. Oliver O. Howard to duty as Commissioner
of the new Bureau.  He was a Maine man, then only thirty-five years of
age.  He had marched with Sherman to the sea, had fought well at
Gettysburg, and but the year before had been assigned to the command of
the Department of Tennessee.  An honest man, with too much faith in
human nature, little aptitude for business and intricate detail, he had
had large opportunity of becoming acquainted at first hand with much of
the work before him.  And of that work it has been truly said that "no
approximately correct history of civilization can ever be written which
does not throw out in bold relief, as one of the great landmarks of
political and social progress, the organization and administration of
the Freedmen's Bureau."

On May 12, 1865, Howard was appointed; and he assumed the duties of his
office promptly on the 15th, and began examining the field of work.  A
curious mess he looked upon: little despotisms, communistic
experiments, slavery, peonage, business speculations, organized
charity, unorganized almsgiving,--all reeling on under the guise of
helping the freedmen, and all enshrined in the smoke and blood of the
war and the cursing and silence of angry men.  On May 19 the new
government--for a government it really was--issued its constitution;
commissioners were to be appointed in each of the seceded states, who
were to take charge of "all subjects relating to refugees and
freedmen," and all relief and rations were to be given by their consent
alone.  The Bureau invited continued cooperation with benevolent
societies, and declared: "It will be the object of all commissioners to
introduce practicable systems of compensated labor," and to establish
schools.  Forthwith nine assistant commissioners were appointed.  They
were to hasten to their fields of work; seek gradually to close relief
establishments, and make the destitute self-supporting; act as courts
of law where there were no courts, or where Negroes were not recognized
in them as free; establish the institution of marriage among ex-slaves,
and keep records; see that freedmen were free to choose their
employers, and help in making fair contracts for them; and finally, the
circular said: "Simple good faith, for which we hope on all hands for
those concerned in the passing away of slavery, will especially relieve
the assistant commissioners in the discharge of their duties toward the
freedmen, as well as promote the general welfare."

No sooner was the work thus started, and the general system and local
organization in some measure begun, than two grave difficulties
appeared which changed largely the theory and outcome of Bureau work.
First, there were the abandoned lands of the South.  It had long been
the more or less definitely expressed theory of the North that all the
chief problems of Emancipation might be settled by establishing the
slaves on the forfeited lands of their masters,--a sort of poetic
justice, said some.  But this poetry done into solemn prose meant
either wholesale confiscation of private property in the South, or vast
appropriations.  Now Congress had not appropriated a cent, and no
sooner did the proclamations of general amnesty appear than the eight
hundred thousand acres of abandoned lands in the hands of the
Freedmen's Bureau melted quickly away.  The second difficulty lay in
perfecting the local organization of the Bureau throughout the wide
field of work.  Making a new machine and sending out officials of duly
ascertained fitness for a great work of social reform is no child's
task; but this task was even harder, for a new central organization had
to be fitted on a heterogeneous and confused but already existing
system of relief and control of ex-slaves; and the agents available for
this work must be sought for in an army still busy with war
operations,--men in the very nature of the case ill fitted for delicate
social work,--or among the questionable camp followers of an invading
host.  Thus, after a year's work, vigorously as it was pushed, the
problem looked even more difficult to grasp and solve than at the
beginning.  Nevertheless, three things that year's work did, well worth
the doing: it relieved a vast amount of physical suffering; it
transported seven thousand fugitives from congested centres back to the
farm; and, best of all, it inaugurated the crusade of the New England
schoolma'am.

The annals of this Ninth Crusade are yet to be written,--the tale of a
mission that seemed to our age far more quixotic than the quest of St.
Louis seemed to his.  Behind the mists of ruin and rapine waved the
calico dresses of women who dared, and after the hoarse mouthings of
the field guns rang the rhythm of the alphabet.  Rich and poor they
were, serious and curious.  Bereaved now of a father, now of a brother,
now of more than these, they came seeking a life work in planting New
England schoolhouses among the white and black of the South.  They did
their work well.  In that first year they taught one hundred thousand
souls, and more.

Evidently, Congress must soon legislate again on the hastily organized
Bureau, which had so quickly grown into wide significance and vast
possibilities.  An institution such as that was well-nigh as difficult
to end as to begin.  Early in 1866 Congress took up the matter, when
Senator Trumbull, of Illinois, introduced a bill to extend the Bureau
and enlarge its powers.  This measure received, at the hands of
Congress, far more thorough discussion and attention than its
predecessor.  The war cloud had thinned enough to allow a clearer
conception of the work of Emancipation.  The champions of the bill
argued that the strengthening of the Freedmen's Bureau was still a
military necessity; that it was needed for the proper carrying out of
the Thirteenth Amendment, and was a work of sheer justice to the
ex-slave, at a trifling cost to the government.  The opponents of the
measure declared that the war was over, and the necessity for war
measures past; that the Bureau, by reason of its extraordinary powers,
was clearly unconstitutional in time of peace, and was destined to
irritate the South and pauperize the freedmen, at a final cost of
possibly hundreds of millions.  These two arguments were unanswered,
and indeed unanswerable: the one that the extraordinary powers of the
Bureau threatened the civil rights of all citizens; and the other that
the government must have power to do what manifestly must be done, and
that present abandonment of the freedmen meant their practical
reenslavement.  The bill which finally passed enlarged and made
permanent the Freedmen's Bureau.  It was promptly vetoed by President
Johnson as "unconstitutional," "unnecessary," and "extrajudicial," and
failed of passage over the veto.  Meantime, however, the breach between
Congress and the President began to broaden, and a modified form of the
lost bill was finally passed over the President's second veto, July 16.

The act of 1866 gave the Freedmen's Bureau its final form,--the form by
which it will be known to posterity and judged of men.  It extended the
existence of the Bureau to July, 1868; it authorized additional
assistant commissioners, the retention of army officers mustered out of
regular service, the sale of certain forfeited lands to freedmen on
nominal terms, the sale of Confederate public property for Negro
schools, and a wider field of judicial interpretation and cognizance.
The government of the unreconstructed South was thus put very largely
in the hands of the Freedmen's Bureau, especially as in many cases the
departmental military commander was now made also assistant
commissioner.  It was thus that the Freedmen's Bureau became a
full-fledged government of men.  It made laws, executed them and
interpreted them; it laid and collected taxes, defined and punished
crime, maintained and used military force, and dictated such measures
as it thought necessary and proper for the accomplishment of its varied
ends.  Naturally, all these powers were not exercised continuously nor
to their fullest extent; and yet, as General Howard has said, "scarcely
any subject that has to be legislated upon in civil society failed, at
one time or another, to demand the action of this singular Bureau."

To understand and criticise intelligently so vast a work, one must not
forget an instant the drift of things in the later sixties.  Lee had
surrendered, Lincoln was dead, and Johnson and Congress were at
loggerheads; the Thirteenth Amendment was adopted, the Fourteenth
pending, and the Fifteenth declared in force in 1870.  Guerrilla
raiding, the ever-present flickering after-flame of war, was spending
its forces against the Negroes, and all the Southern land was awakening
as from some wild dream to poverty and social revolution.  In a time of
perfect calm, amid willing neighbors and streaming wealth, the social
uplifting of four million slaves to an assured and self-sustaining
place in the body politic and economic would have been a herculean
task; but when to the inherent difficulties of so delicate and nice a
social operation were added the spite and hate of conflict, the hell of
war; when suspicion and cruelty were rife, and gaunt Hunger wept beside
Bereavement,--in such a case, the work of any instrument of social
regeneration was in large part foredoomed to failure.  The very name of
the Bureau stood for a thing in the South which for two centuries and
better men had refused even to argue,--that life amid free Negroes was
simply unthinkable, the maddest of experiments.

The agents that the Bureau could command varied all the way from
unselfish philanthropists to narrow-minded busybodies and thieves; and
even though it be true that the average was far better than the worst,
it was the occasional fly that helped spoil the ointment.

Then amid all crouched the freed slave, bewildered between friend and
foe.  He had emerged from slavery,--not the worst slavery in the world,
not a slavery that made all life unbearable, rather a slavery that had
here and there something of kindliness, fidelity, and happiness,--but
withal slavery, which, so far as human aspiration and desert were
concerned, classed the black man and the ox together.  And the Negro
knew full well that, whatever their deeper convictions may have been,
Southern men had fought with desperate energy to perpetuate this
slavery under which the black masses, with half-articulate thought, had
writhed and shivered.  They welcomed freedom with a cry.  They shrank
from the master who still strove for their chains; they fled to the
friends that had freed them, even though those friends stood ready to
use them as a club for driving the recalcitrant South back into
loyalty.  So the cleft between the white and black South grew.  Idle to
say it never should have been; it was as inevitable as its results were
pitiable.  Curiously incongruous elements were left arrayed against
each other,--the North, the government, the carpet-bagger, and the
slave, here; and there, all the South that was white, whether gentleman
or vagabond, honest man or rascal, lawless murderer or martyr to duty.

Thus it is doubly difficult to write of this period calmly, so intense
was the feeling, so mighty the human passions that swayed and blinded
men.  Amid it all, two figures ever stand to typify that day to coming
ages,--the one, a gray-haired gentleman, whose fathers had quit
themselves like men, whose sons lay in nameless graves; who bowed to
the evil of slavery because its abolition threatened untold ill to all;
who stood at last, in the evening of life, a blighted, ruined form,
with hate in his eyes;--and the other, a form hovering dark and
mother-like, her awful face black with the mists of centuries, had
aforetime quailed at that white master's command, had bent in love over
the cradles of his sons and daughters, and closed in death the sunken
eyes of his wife,--aye, too, at his behest had laid herself low to his
lust, and borne a tawny man-child to the world, only to see her dark
boy's limbs scattered to the winds by midnight marauders riding after
"damned Niggers."  These were the saddest sights of that woful day; and
no man clasped the hands of these two passing figures of the
present-past; but, hating, they went to their long home, and, hating,
their children's children live today.

Here, then, was the field of work for the Freedmen's Bureau; and since,
with some hesitation, it was continued by the act of 1868 until 1869,
let us look upon four years of its work as a whole.  There were, in
1868, nine hundred Bureau officials scattered from Washington to Texas,
ruling, directly and indirectly, many millions of men.  The deeds of
these rulers fall mainly under seven heads: the relief of physical
suffering, the overseeing of the beginnings of free labor, the buying
and selling of land, the establishment of schools, the paying of
bounties, the administration of justice, and the financiering of all
these activities.

Up to June, 1869, over half a million patients had been treated by
Bureau physicians and surgeons, and sixty hospitals and asylums had
been in operation.  In fifty months twenty-one million free rations
were distributed at a cost of over four million dollars.  Next came the
difficult question of labor.  First, thirty thousand black men were
transported from the refuges and relief stations back to the farms,
back to the critical trial of a new way of working.  Plain instructions
went out from Washington: the laborers must be free to choose their
employers, no fixed rate of wages was prescribed, and there was to be
no peonage or forced labor.  So far, so good; but where local agents
differed toto caelo in capacity and character, where the personnel was
continually changing, the outcome was necessarily varied.  The largest
element of success lay in the fact that the majority of the freedmen
were willing, even eager, to work.  So labor contracts were
written,--fifty thousand in a single State,--laborers advised, wages
guaranteed, and employers supplied.  In truth, the organization became
a vast labor bureau,--not perfect, indeed, notably defective here and
there, but on the whole successful beyond the dreams of thoughtful men.
The two great obstacles which confronted the officials were the tyrant
and the idler,--the slaveholder who was determined to perpetuate
slavery under another name; and, the freedman who regarded freedom as
perpetual rest,--the Devil and the Deep Sea.

In the work of establishing the Negroes as peasant proprietors, the
Bureau was from the first handicapped and at last absolutely checked.
Something was done, and larger things were planned; abandoned lands
were leased so long as they remained in the hands of the Bureau, and a
total revenue of nearly half a million dollars derived from black
tenants.  Some other lands to which the nation had gained title were
sold on easy terms, and public lands were opened for settlement to the
very few freedmen who had tools and capital.  But the vision of "forty
acres and a mule"--the righteous and reasonable ambition to become a
landholder, which the nation had all but categorically promised the
freedmen--was destined in most cases to bitter disappointment.  And
those men of marvellous hindsight who are today seeking to preach the
Negro back to the present peonage of the soil know well, or ought to
know, that the opportunity of binding the Negro peasant willingly to
the soil was lost on that day when the Commissioner of the Freedmen's
Bureau had to go to South Carolina and tell the weeping freedmen, after
their years of toil, that their land was not theirs, that there was a
mistake--somewhere.  If by 1874 the Georgia Negro alone owned three
hundred and fifty thousand acres of land, it was by grace of his thrift
rather than by bounty of the government.

The greatest success of the Freedmen's Bureau lay in the planting of
the free school among Negroes, and the idea of free elementary
education among all classes in the South.  It not only called the
school-mistresses through the benevolent agencies and built them
schoolhouses, but it helped discover and support such apostles of human
culture as Edmund Ware, Samuel Armstrong, and Erastus Cravath.  The
opposition to Negro education in the South was at first bitter, and
showed itself in ashes, insult, and blood; for the South believed an
educated Negro to be a dangerous Negro.  And the South was not wholly
wrong; for education among all kinds of men always has had, and always
will have, an element of danger and revolution, of dissatisfaction and
discontent.  Nevertheless, men strive to know.  Perhaps some inkling of
this paradox, even in the unquiet days of the Bureau, helped the
bayonets allay an opposition to human training which still to-day lies
smouldering in the South, but not flaming.  Fisk, Atlanta, Howard, and
Hampton were founded in these days, and six million dollars were
expended for educational work, seven hundred and fifty thousand dollars
of which the freedmen themselves gave of their poverty.

Such contributions, together with the buying of land and various other
enterprises, showed that the ex-slave was handling some free capital
already.  The chief initial source of this was labor in the army, and
his pay and bounty as a soldier.  Payments to Negro soldiers were at
first complicated by the ignorance of the recipients, and the fact that
the quotas of colored regiments from Northern States were largely
filled by recruits from the South, unknown to their fellow soldiers.
Consequently, payments were accompanied by such frauds that Congress,
by joint resolution in 1867, put the whole matter in the hands of the
Freedmen's Bureau.  In two years six million dollars was thus
distributed to five thousand claimants, and in the end the sum exceeded
eight million dollars.  Even in this system fraud was frequent; but
still the work put needed capital in the hands of practical paupers,
and some, at least, was well spent.

The most perplexing and least successful part of the Bureau's work lay
in the exercise of its judicial functions.  The regular Bureau court
consisted of one representative of the employer, one of the Negro, and
one of the Bureau.  If the Bureau could have maintained a perfectly
judicial attitude, this arrangement would have been ideal, and must in
time have gained confidence; but the nature of its other activities and
the character of its personnel prejudiced the Bureau in favor of the
black litigants, and led without doubt to much injustice and annoyance.
On the other hand, to leave the Negro in the hands of Southern courts
was impossible.  In a distracted land where slavery had hardly fallen,
to keep the strong from wanton abuse of the weak, and the weak from
gloating insolently over the half-shorn strength of the strong, was a
thankless, hopeless task.  The former masters of the land were
peremptorily ordered about, seized, and imprisoned, and punished over
and again, with scant courtesy from army officers.  The former slaves
were intimidated, beaten, raped, and butchered by angry and revengeful
men.  Bureau courts tended to become centres simply for punishing
whites, while the regular civil courts tended to become solely
institutions for perpetuating the slavery of blacks.  Almost every law
and method ingenuity could devise was employed by the legislatures to
reduce the Negroes to serfdom,--to make them the slaves of the State,
if not of individual owners; while the Bureau officials too often were
found striving to put the "bottom rail on top," and gave the freedmen a
power and independence which they could not yet use.  It is all well
enough for us of another generation to wax wise with advice to those
who bore the burden in the heat of the day.  It is full easy now to see
that the man who lost home, fortune, and family at a stroke, and saw
his land ruled by "mules and niggers," was really benefited by the
passing of slavery.  It is not difficult now to say to the young
freedman, cheated and cuffed about who has seen his father's head
beaten to a jelly and his own mother namelessly assaulted, that the
meek shall inherit the earth.  Above all, nothing is more convenient
than to heap on the Freedmen's Bureau all the evils of that evil day,
and damn it utterly for every mistake and blunder that was made.

All this is easy, but it is neither sensible nor just.  Someone had
blundered, but that was long before Oliver Howard was born; there was
criminal aggression and heedless neglect, but without some system of
control there would have been far more than there was.  Had that
control been from within, the Negro would have been re-enslaved, to all
intents and purposes.  Coming as the control did from without, perfect
men and methods would have bettered all things; and even with imperfect
agents and questionable methods, the work accomplished was not
undeserving of commendation.

 Such was the dawn of Freedom; such was the work of the
Freedmen's Bureau, which, summed up in brief, may be epitomized thus:
for some fifteen million dollars, beside the sums spent before 1865,
and the dole of benevolent societies, this Bureau set going a system of
free labor, established a beginning of peasant proprietorship, secured
the recognition of black freedmen before courts of law, and founded the
free common school in the South.  On the other hand, it failed to begin
the establishment of good-will between ex-masters and freedmen, to
guard its work wholly from paternalistic methods which discouraged
self-reliance, and to carry out to any considerable extent its implied
promises to furnish the freedmen with land.  Its successes were the
result of hard work, supplemented by the aid of philanthropists and the
eager striving of black men.  Its failures were the result of bad local
agents, the inherent difficulties of the work, and national neglect.

Such an institution, from its wide powers, great responsibilities,
large control of moneys, and generally conspicuous position, was
naturally open to repeated and bitter attack.  It sustained a searching
Congressional investigation at the instance of Fernando Wood in 1870.
Its archives and few remaining functions were with blunt discourtesy
transferred from Howard's control, in his absence, to the supervision
of Secretary of War Belknap in 1872, on the Secretary's recommendation.
Finally, in consequence of grave intimations of wrong-doing made by the
Secretary and his subordinates, General Howard was court-martialed in
1874.  In both of these trials the Commissioner of the Freedmen's
Bureau was officially exonerated from any wilful misdoing, and his work
commended.  Nevertheless, many unpleasant things were brought to
light,--the methods of transacting the business of the Bureau were
faulty; several cases of defalcation were proved, and other frauds
strongly suspected; there were some business transactions which savored
of dangerous speculation, if not dishonesty; and around it all lay the
smirch of the Freedmen's Bank.

Morally and practically, the Freedmen's Bank was part of the Freedmen's
Bureau, although it had no legal connection with it.  With the prestige
of the government back of it, and a directing board of unusual
respectability and national reputation, this banking institution had
made a remarkable start in the development of that thrift among black
folk which slavery had kept them from knowing.  Then in one sad day
came the crash,--all the hard-earned dollars of the freedmen
disappeared; but that was the least of the loss,--all the faith in
saving went too, and much of the faith in men; and that was a loss that
a Nation which to-day sneers at Negro shiftlessness has never yet made
good.  Not even ten additional years of slavery could have done so much
to throttle the thrift of the freedmen as the mismanagement and
bankruptcy of the series of savings banks chartered by the Nation for
their especial aid.  Where all the blame should rest, it is hard to
say; whether the Bureau and the Bank died chiefly by reason of the
blows of its selfish friends or the dark machinations of its foes,
perhaps even time will never reveal, for here lies unwritten history.

Of the foes without the Bureau, the bitterest were those who attacked
not so much its conduct or policy under the law as the necessity for
any such institution at all.  Such attacks came primarily from the
Border States and the South; and they were summed up by Senator Davis,
of Kentucky, when he moved to entitle the act of 1866 a bill "to
promote strife and conflict between the white and black races . . . by
a grant of unconstitutional power."  The argument gathered tremendous
strength South and North; but its very strength was its weakness.  For,
argued the plain common-sense of the nation, if it is unconstitutional,
unpractical, and futile for the nation to stand guardian over its
helpless wards, then there is left but one alternative,--to make those
wards their own guardians by arming them with the ballot.  Moreover,
the path of the practical politician pointed the same way; for, argued
this opportunist, if we cannot peacefully reconstruct the South with
white votes, we certainly can with black votes.  So justice and force
joined hands.

The alternative thus offered the nation was not between full and
restricted Negro suffrage; else every sensible man, black and white,
would easily have chosen the latter.  It was rather a choice between
suffrage and slavery, after endless blood and gold had flowed to sweep
human bondage away.  Not a single Southern legislature stood ready to
admit a Negro, under any conditions, to the polls; not a single
Southern legislature believed free Negro labor was possible without a
system of restrictions that took all its freedom away; there was
scarcely a white man in the South who did not honestly regard
Emancipation as a crime, and its practical nullification as a duty.  In
such a situation, the granting of the ballot to the black man was a
necessity, the very least a guilty nation could grant a wronged race,
and the only method of compelling the South to accept the results of
the war.  Thus Negro suffrage ended a civil war by beginning a race
feud.  And some felt gratitude toward the race thus sacrificed in its
swaddling clothes on the altar of national integrity; and some felt and
feel only indifference and contempt.

Had political exigencies been less pressing, the opposition to
government guardianship of Negroes less bitter, and the attachment to
the slave system less strong, the social seer can well imagine a far
better policy,--a permanent Freedmen's Bureau, with a national system
of Negro schools; a carefully supervised employment and labor office; a
system of impartial protection before the regular courts; and such
institutions for social betterment as savings-banks, land and building
associations, and social settlements.  All this vast expenditure of
money and brains might have formed a great school of prospective
citizenship, and solved in a way we have not yet solved the most
perplexing and persistent of the Negro problems.

That such an institution was unthinkable in 1870 was due in part to
certain acts of the Freedmen's Bureau itself.  It came to regard its
work as merely temporary, and Negro suffrage as a final answer to all
present perplexities.  The political ambition of many of its agents and
proteges led it far afield into questionable activities, until the
South, nursing its own deep prejudices, came easily to ignore all the
good deeds of the Bureau and hate its very name with perfect hatred.
So the Freedmen's Bureau died, and its child was the Fifteenth
Amendment.

The passing of a great human institution before its work is done, like
the untimely passing of a single soul, but leaves a legacy of striving
for other men.  The legacy of the Freedmen's Bureau is the heavy
heritage of this generation.  To-day, when new and vaster problems are
destined to strain every fibre of the national mind and soul, would it
not be well to count this legacy honestly and carefully?  For this much
all men know: despite compromise, war, and struggle, the Negro is not
free.  In the backwoods of the Gulf States, for miles and miles, he may
not leave the plantation of his birth; in well-nigh the whole rural
South the black farmers are peons, bound by law and custom to an
economic slavery, from which the only escape is death or the
penitentiary.  In the most cultured sections and cities of the South
the Negroes are a segregated servile caste, with restricted rights and
privileges.  Before the courts, both in law and custom, they stand on a
different and peculiar basis.  Taxation without representation is the
rule of their political life.  And the result of all this is, and in
nature must have been, lawlessness and crime.  That is the large legacy
of the Freedmen's Bureau, the work it did not do because it could not.


I have seen a land right merry with the sun, where children sing, and
rolling hills lie like passioned women wanton with harvest.  And there
in the King's Highways sat and sits a figure veiled and bowed, by which
the traveller's footsteps hasten as they go.  On the tainted air broods
fear.  Three centuries' thought has been the raising and unveiling of
that bowed human heart, and now behold a century new for the duty and
the deed.  The problem of the Twentieth Century is the problem of the
color-line.




III

Of Mr. Booker T. Washington and Others

  From birth till death enslaved; in word, in deed, unmanned!
  *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *
  Hereditary bondsmen!  Know ye not
  Who would be free themselves must strike the blow?

  BYRON.

Easily the most striking thing in the history of the American Negro
since 1876 is the ascendancy of Mr. Booker T. Washington.  It began at
the time when war memories and ideals were rapidly passing; a day of
astonishing commercial development was dawning; a sense of doubt and
hesitation overtook the freedmen's sons,--then it was that his leading
began.  Mr. Washington came, with a simple definite programme, at the
psychological moment when the nation was a little ashamed of having
bestowed so much sentiment on Negroes, and was concentrating its
energies on Dollars.  His programme of industrial education,
conciliation of the South, and submission and silence as to civil and
political rights, was not wholly original; the Free Negroes from 1830
up to war-time had striven to build industrial schools, and the
American Missionary Association had from the first taught various
trades; and Price and others had sought a way of honorable alliance
with the best of the Southerners.  But Mr. Washington first
indissolubly linked these things; he put enthusiasm, unlimited energy,
and perfect faith into his programme, and changed it from a by-path
into a veritable Way of Life.  And the tale of the methods by which he
did this is a fascinating study of human life.

It startled the nation to hear a Negro advocating such a programme
after many decades of bitter complaint; it startled and won the
applause of the South, it interested and won the admiration of the
North; and after a confused murmur of protest, it silenced if it did
not convert the Negroes themselves.

To gain the sympathy and cooperation of the various elements comprising
the white South was Mr. Washington's first task; and this, at the time
Tuskegee was founded, seemed, for a black man, well-nigh impossible.
And yet ten years later it was done in the word spoken at Atlanta: "In
all things purely social we can be as separate as the five fingers, and
yet one as the hand in all things essential to mutual progress."  This
"Atlanta Compromise" is by all odds the most notable thing in Mr.
Washington's career.  The South interpreted it in different ways: the
radicals received it as a complete surrender of the demand for civil
and political equality; the conservatives, as a generously conceived
working basis for mutual understanding.  So both approved it, and
to-day its author is certainly the most distinguished Southerner since
Jefferson Davis, and the one with the largest personal following.

Next to this achievement comes Mr. Washington's work in gaining place
and consideration in the North.  Others less shrewd and tactful had
formerly essayed to sit on these two stools and had fallen between
them; but as Mr. Washington knew the heart of the South from birth and
training, so by singular insight he intuitively grasped the spirit of
the age which was dominating the North.  And so thoroughly did he learn
the speech and thought of triumphant commercialism, and the ideals of
material prosperity, that the picture of a lone black boy poring over a
French grammar amid the weeds and dirt of a neglected home soon seemed
to him the acme of absurdities.  One wonders what Socrates and St.
Francis of Assisi would say to this.

And yet this very singleness of vision and thorough oneness with his
age is a mark of the successful man.  It is as though Nature must needs
make men narrow in order to give them force.  So Mr. Washington's cult
has gained unquestioning followers, his work has wonderfully prospered,
his friends are legion, and his enemies are confounded.  To-day he
stands as the one recognized spokesman of his ten million fellows, and
one of the most notable figures in a nation of seventy millions.  One
hesitates, therefore, to criticise a life which, beginning with so
little, has done so much.  And yet the time is come when one may speak
in all sincerity and utter courtesy of the mistakes and shortcomings of
Mr. Washington's career, as well as of his triumphs, without being
thought captious or envious, and without forgetting that it is easier
to do ill than well in the world.

The criticism that has hitherto met Mr. Washington has not always been
of this broad character.  In the South especially has he had to walk
warily to avoid the harshest judgments,--and naturally so, for he is
dealing with the one subject of deepest sensitiveness to that section.
Twice--once when at the Chicago celebration of the Spanish-American War
he alluded to the color-prejudice that is "eating away the vitals of
the South," and once when he dined with President Roosevelt--has the
resulting Southern criticism been violent enough to threaten seriously
his popularity.  In the North the feeling has several times forced
itself into words, that Mr. Washington's counsels of submission
overlooked certain elements of true manhood, and that his educational
programme was unnecessarily narrow.  Usually, however, such criticism
has not found open expression, although, too, the spiritual sons of the
Abolitionists have not been prepared to acknowledge that the schools
founded before Tuskegee, by men of broad ideals and self-sacrificing
spirit, were wholly failures or worthy of ridicule.  While, then,
criticism has not failed to follow Mr. Washington, yet the prevailing
public opinion of the land has been but too willing to deliver the
solution of a wearisome problem into his hands, and say, "If that is
all you and your race ask, take it."

Among his own people, however, Mr. Washington has encountered the
strongest and most lasting opposition, amounting at times to
bitterness, and even today continuing strong and insistent even though
largely silenced in outward expression by the public opinion of the
nation.  Some of this opposition is, of course, mere envy; the
disappointment of displaced demagogues and the spite of narrow minds.
But aside from this, there is among educated and thoughtful colored men
in all parts of the land a feeling of deep regret, sorrow, and
apprehension at the wide currency and ascendancy which some of Mr.
Washington's theories have gained.  These same men admire his sincerity
of purpose, and are willing to forgive much to honest endeavor which is
doing something worth the doing.  They cooperate with Mr. Washington as
far as they conscientiously can; and, indeed, it is no ordinary tribute
to this man's tact and power that, steering as he must between so many
diverse interests and opinions, he so largely retains the respect of
all.

But the hushing of the criticism of honest opponents is a dangerous
thing.  It leads some of the best of the critics to unfortunate silence
and paralysis of effort, and others to burst into speech so
passionately and intemperately as to lose listeners.  Honest and
earnest criticism from those whose interests are most nearly
touched,--criticism of writers by readers,--this is the soul of
democracy and the safeguard of modern society.  If the best of the
American Negroes receive by outer pressure a leader whom they had not
recognized before, manifestly there is here a certain palpable gain.
Yet there is also irreparable loss,--a loss of that peculiarly valuable
education which a group receives when by search and criticism it finds
and commissions its own leaders.  The way in which this is done is at
once the most elementary and the nicest problem of social growth.
History is but the record of such group-leadership; and yet how
infinitely changeful is its type and character!  And of all types and
kinds, what can be more instructive than the leadership of a group
within a group?--that curious double movement where real progress may
be negative and actual advance be relative retrogression.  All this is
the social student's inspiration and despair.

Now in the past the American Negro has had instructive experience in
the choosing of group leaders, founding thus a peculiar dynasty which
in the light of present conditions is worth while studying.  When
sticks and stones and beasts form the sole environment of a people,
their attitude is largely one of determined opposition to and conquest
of natural forces.  But when to earth and brute is added an environment
of men and ideas, then the attitude of the imprisoned group may take
three main forms,--a feeling of revolt and revenge; an attempt to
adjust all thought and action to the will of the greater group; or,
finally, a determined effort at self-realization and self-development
despite environing opinion.  The influence of all of these attitudes at
various times can be traced in the history of the American Negro, and
in the evolution of his successive leaders.

Before 1750, while the fire of African freedom still burned in the
veins of the slaves, there was in all leadership or attempted
leadership but the one motive of revolt and revenge,--typified in the
terrible Maroons, the Danish blacks, and Cato of Stono, and veiling all
the Americas in fear of insurrection.  The liberalizing tendencies of
the latter half of the eighteenth century brought, along with kindlier
relations between black and white, thoughts of ultimate adjustment and
assimilation.  Such aspiration was especially voiced in the earnest
songs of Phyllis, in the martyrdom of Attucks, the fighting of Salem
and Poor, the intellectual accomplishments of Banneker and Derham, and
the political demands of the Cuffes.

Stern financial and social stress after the war cooled much of the
previous humanitarian ardor.  The disappointment and impatience of the
Negroes at the persistence of slavery and serfdom voiced itself in two
movements.  The slaves in the South, aroused undoubtedly by vague
rumors of the Haytian revolt, made three fierce attempts at
insurrection,--in 1800 under Gabriel in Virginia, in 1822 under Vesey
in Carolina, and in 1831 again in Virginia under the terrible Nat
Turner.  In the Free States, on the other hand, a new and curious
attempt at self-development was made.  In Philadelphia and New York
color-prescription led to a withdrawal of Negro communicants from white
churches and the formation of a peculiar socio-religious institution
among the Negroes known as the African Church,--an organization still
living and controlling in its various branches over a million of men.

Walker's wild appeal against the trend of the times showed how the
world was changing after the coming of the cotton-gin.  By 1830 slavery
seemed hopelessly fastened on the South, and the slaves thoroughly
cowed into submission.  The free Negroes of the North, inspired by the
mulatto immigrants from the West Indies, began to change the basis of
their demands; they recognized the slavery of slaves, but insisted that
they themselves were freemen, and sought assimilation and amalgamation
with the nation on the same terms with other men.  Thus, Forten and
Purvis of Philadelphia, Shad of Wilmington, Du Bois of New Haven,
Barbadoes of Boston, and others, strove singly and together as men,
they said, not as slaves; as "people of color," not as "Negroes."  The
trend of the times, however, refused them recognition save in
individual and exceptional cases, considered them as one with all the
despised blacks, and they soon found themselves striving to keep even
the rights they formerly had of voting and working and moving as
freemen.  Schemes of migration and colonization arose among them; but
these they refused to entertain, and they eventually turned to the
Abolition movement as a final refuge.

Here, led by Remond, Nell, Wells-Brown, and Douglass, a new period of
self-assertion and self-development dawned.  To be sure, ultimate
freedom and assimilation was the ideal before the leaders, but the
assertion of the manhood rights of the Negro by himself was the main
reliance, and John Brown's raid was the extreme of its logic.  After
the war and emancipation, the great form of Frederick Douglass, the
greatest of American Negro leaders, still led the host.
Self-assertion, especially in political lines, was the main programme,
and behind Douglass came Elliot, Bruce, and Langston, and the
Reconstruction politicians, and, less conspicuous but of greater social
significance, Alexander Crummell and Bishop Daniel Payne.

Then came the Revolution of 1876, the suppression of the Negro votes,
the changing and shifting of ideals, and the seeking of new lights in
the great night.  Douglass, in his old age, still bravely stood for the
ideals of his early manhood,--ultimate assimilation through
self-assertion, and on no other terms.  For a time Price arose as a new
leader, destined, it seemed, not to give up, but to re-state the old
ideals in a form less repugnant to the white South.  But he passed away
in his prime.  Then came the new leader.  Nearly all the former ones
had become leaders by the silent suffrage of their fellows, had sought
to lead their own people alone, and were usually, save Douglass, little
known outside their race.  But Booker T. Washington arose as
essentially the leader not of one race but of two,--a compromiser
between the South, the North, and the Negro.  Naturally the Negroes
resented, at first bitterly, signs of compromise which surrendered
their civil and political rights, even though this was to be exchanged
for larger chances of economic development.  The rich and dominating
North, however, was not only weary of the race problem, but was
investing largely in Southern enterprises, and welcomed any method of
peaceful cooperation.  Thus, by national opinion, the Negroes began to
recognize Mr. Washington's leadership; and the voice of criticism was
hushed.

Mr. Washington represents in Negro thought the old attitude of
adjustment and submission; but adjustment at such a peculiar time as to
make his programme unique.  This is an age of unusual economic
development, and Mr. Washington's programme naturally takes an economic
cast, becoming a gospel of Work and Money to such an extent as
apparently almost completely to overshadow the higher aims of life.
Moreover, this is an age when the more advanced races are coming in
closer contact with the less developed races, and the race-feeling is
therefore intensified; and Mr. Washington's programme practically
accepts the alleged inferiority of the Negro races.  Again, in our own
land, the reaction from the sentiment of war time has given impetus to
race-prejudice against Negroes, and Mr. Washington withdraws many of
the high demands of Negroes as men and American citizens.  In other
periods of intensified prejudice all the Negro's tendency to
self-assertion has been called forth; at this period a policy of
submission is advocated.  In the history of nearly all other races and
peoples the doctrine preached at such crises has been that manly
self-respect is worth more than lands and houses, and that a people who
voluntarily surrender such respect, or cease striving for it, are not
worth civilizing.

In answer to this, it has been claimed that the Negro can survive only
through submission.  Mr. Washington distinctly asks that black people
give up, at least for the present, three things,--

First, political power,

Second, insistence on civil rights,

Third, higher education of Negro youth,--and concentrate all their
energies on industrial education, and accumulation of wealth, and the
conciliation of the South.  This policy has been courageously and
insistently advocated for over fifteen years, and has been triumphant
for perhaps ten years.  As a result of this tender of the palm-branch,
what has been the return?  In these years there have occurred:

1.  The disfranchisement of the Negro.

2.  The legal creation of a distinct status of civil inferiority for
the Negro.

3.  The steady withdrawal of aid from institutions for the higher
training of the Negro.

These movements are not, to be sure, direct results of Mr. Washington's
teachings; but his propaganda has, without a shadow of doubt, helped
their speedier accomplishment.  The question then comes: Is it
possible, and probable, that nine millions of men can make effective
progress in economic lines if they are deprived of political rights,
made a servile caste, and allowed only the most meagre chance for
developing their exceptional men?  If history and reason give any
distinct answer to these questions, it is an emphatic NO.  And Mr.
Washington thus faces the triple paradox of his career:

1.  He is striving nobly to make Negro artisans business men and
property-owners; but it is utterly impossible, under modern competitive
methods, for workingmen and property-owners to defend their rights and
exist without the right of suffrage.

2.  He insists on thrift and self-respect, but at the same time
counsels a silent submission to civic inferiority such as is bound to
sap the manhood of any race in the long run.

3.  He advocates common-school and industrial training, and depreciates
institutions of higher learning; but neither the Negro common-schools,
nor Tuskegee itself, could remain open a day were it not for teachers
trained in Negro colleges, or trained by their graduates.

This triple paradox in Mr. Washington's position is the object of
criticism by two classes of colored Americans.  One class is
spiritually descended from Toussaint the Savior, through Gabriel,
Vesey, and Turner, and they represent the attitude of revolt and
revenge; they hate the white South blindly and distrust the white race
generally, and so far as they agree on definite action, think that the
Negro's only hope lies in emigration beyond the borders of the United
States.  And yet, by the irony of fate, nothing has more effectually
made this programme seem hopeless than the recent course of the United
States toward weaker and darker peoples in the West Indies, Hawaii, and
the Philippines,--for where in the world may we go and be safe from
lying and brute force?

The other class of Negroes who cannot agree with Mr. Washington has
hitherto said little aloud.  They deprecate the sight of scattered
counsels, of internal disagreement; and especially they dislike making
their just criticism of a useful and earnest man an excuse for a
general discharge of venom from small-minded opponents.  Nevertheless,
the questions involved are so fundamental and serious that it is
difficult to see how men like the Grimkes, Kelly Miller, J. W. E.
Bowen, and other representatives of this group, can much longer be
silent.  Such men feel in conscience bound to ask of this nation three
things:

1.  The right to vote.

2.  Civic equality.

3.  The education of youth according to ability.  They acknowledge Mr.
Washington's invaluable service in counselling patience and courtesy in
such demands; they do not ask that ignorant black men vote when
ignorant whites are debarred, or that any reasonable restrictions in
the suffrage should not be applied; they know that the low social level
of the mass of the race is responsible for much discrimination against
it, but they also know, and the nation knows, that relentless
color-prejudice is more often a cause than a result of the Negro's
degradation; they seek the abatement of this relic of barbarism, and
not its systematic encouragement and pampering by all agencies of
social power from the Associated Press to the Church of Christ.  They
advocate, with Mr. Washington, a broad system of Negro common schools
supplemented by thorough industrial training; but they are surprised
that a man of Mr. Washington's insight cannot see that no such
educational system ever has rested or can rest on any other basis than
that of the well-equipped college and university, and they insist that
there is a demand for a few such institutions throughout the South to
train the best of the Negro youth as teachers, professional men, and
leaders.

This group of men honor Mr. Washington for his attitude of conciliation
toward the white South; they accept the "Atlanta Compromise" in its
broadest interpretation; they recognize, with him, many signs of
promise, many men of high purpose and fair judgment, in this section;
they know that no easy task has been laid upon a region already
tottering under heavy burdens.  But, nevertheless, they insist that the
way to truth and right lies in straightforward honesty, not in
indiscriminate flattery; in praising those of the South who do well and
criticising uncompromisingly those who do ill; in taking advantage of
the opportunities at hand and urging their fellows to do the same, but
at the same time in remembering that only a firm adherence to their
higher ideals and aspirations will ever keep those ideals within the
realm of possibility.  They do not expect that the free right to vote,
to enjoy civic rights, and to be educated, will come in a moment; they
do not expect to see the bias and prejudices of years disappear at the
blast of a trumpet; but they are absolutely certain that the way for a
people to gain their reasonable rights is not by voluntarily throwing
them away and insisting that they do not want them; that the way for a
people to gain respect is not by continually belittling and ridiculing
themselves; that, on the contrary, Negroes must insist continually, in
season and out of season, that voting is necessary to modern manhood,
that color discrimination is barbarism, and that black boys need
education as well as white boys.

In failing thus to state plainly and unequivocally the legitimate
demands of their people, even at the cost of opposing an honored
leader, the thinking classes of American Negroes would shirk a heavy
responsibility,--a responsibility to themselves, a responsibility to
the struggling masses, a responsibility to the darker races of men
whose future depends so largely on this American experiment, but
especially a responsibility to this nation,--this common Fatherland.
It is wrong to encourage a man or a people in evil-doing; it is wrong
to aid and abet a national crime simply because it is unpopular not to
do so.  The growing spirit of kindliness and reconciliation between the
North and South after the frightful difference of a generation ago
ought to be a source of deep congratulation to all, and especially to
those whose mistreatment caused the war; but if that reconciliation is
to be marked by the industrial slavery and civic death of those same
black men, with permanent legislation into a position of inferiority,
then those black men, if they are really men, are called upon by every
consideration of patriotism and loyalty to oppose such a course by all
civilized methods, even though such opposition involves disagreement
with Mr. Booker T. Washington.  We have no right to sit silently by
while the inevitable seeds are sown for a harvest of disaster to our
children, black and white.

First, it is the duty of black men to judge the South discriminatingly.
The present generation of Southerners are not responsible for the past,
and they should not be blindly hated or blamed for it.  Furthermore, to
no class is the indiscriminate endorsement of the recent course of the
South toward Negroes more nauseating than to the best thought of the
South.  The South is not "solid"; it is a land in the ferment of social
change, wherein forces of all kinds are fighting for supremacy; and to
praise the ill the South is today perpetrating is just as wrong as to
condemn the good.  Discriminating and broad-minded criticism is what
the South needs,--needs it for the sake of her own white sons and
daughters, and for the insurance of robust, healthy mental and moral
development.

Today even the attitude of the Southern whites toward the blacks is
not, as so many assume, in all cases the same; the ignorant Southerner
hates the Negro, the workingmen fear his competition, the money-makers
wish to use him as a laborer, some of the educated see a menace in his
upward development, while others--usually the sons of the masters--wish
to help him to rise.  National opinion has enabled this last class to
maintain the Negro common schools, and to protect the Negro partially
in property, life, and limb.  Through the pressure of the money-makers,
the Negro is in danger of being reduced to semi-slavery, especially in
the country districts; the workingmen, and those of the educated who
fear the Negro, have united to disfranchise him, and some have urged
his deportation; while the passions of the ignorant are easily aroused
to lynch and abuse any black man.  To praise this intricate whirl of
thought and prejudice is nonsense; to inveigh indiscriminately against
"the South" is unjust; but to use the same breath in praising Governor
Aycock, exposing Senator Morgan, arguing with Mr. Thomas Nelson Page,
and denouncing Senator Ben Tillman, is not only sane, but the
imperative duty of thinking black men.

It would be unjust to Mr. Washington not to acknowledge that in several
instances he has opposed movements in the South which were unjust to
the Negro; he sent memorials to the Louisiana and Alabama
constitutional conventions, he has spoken against lynching, and in
other ways has openly or silently set his influence against sinister
schemes and unfortunate happenings.  Notwithstanding this, it is
equally true to assert that on the whole the distinct impression left
by Mr. Washington's propaganda is, first, that the South is justified
in its present attitude toward the Negro because of the Negro's
degradation; secondly, that the prime cause of the Negro's failure to
rise more quickly is his wrong education in the past; and, thirdly,
that his future rise depends primarily on his own efforts.  Each of
these propositions is a dangerous half-truth.  The supplementary truths
must never be lost sight of: first, slavery and race-prejudice are
potent if not sufficient causes of the Negro's position; second,
industrial and common-school training were necessarily slow in planting
because they had to await the black teachers trained by higher
institutions,--it being extremely doubtful if any essentially different
development was possible, and certainly a Tuskegee was unthinkable
before 1880; and, third, while it is a great truth to say that the
Negro must strive and strive mightily to help himself, it is equally
true that unless his striving be not simply seconded, but rather
aroused and encouraged, by the initiative of the richer and wiser
environing group, he cannot hope for great success.

In his failure to realize and impress this last point, Mr. Washington
is especially to be criticised.  His doctrine has tended to make the
whites, North and South, shift the burden of the Negro problem to the
Negro's shoulders and stand aside as critical and rather pessimistic
spectators; when in fact the burden belongs to the nation, and the
hands of none of us are clean if we bend not our energies to righting
these great wrongs.

The South ought to be led, by candid and honest criticism, to assert
her better self and do her full duty to the race she has cruelly
wronged and is still wronging.  The North--her co-partner in
guilt--cannot salve her conscience by plastering it with gold.  We
cannot settle this problem by diplomacy and suaveness, by "policy"
alone.  If worse come to worst, can the moral fibre of this country
survive the slow throttling and murder of nine millions of men?

The black men of America have a duty to perform, a duty stern and
delicate,--a forward movement to oppose a part of the work of their
greatest leader.  So far as Mr. Washington preaches Thrift, Patience,
and Industrial Training for the masses, we must hold up his hands and
strive with him, rejoicing in his honors and glorying in the strength
of this Joshua called of God and of man to lead the headless host.  But
so far as Mr. Washington apologizes for injustice, North or South, does
not rightly value the privilege and duty of voting, belittles the
emasculating effects of caste distinctions, and opposes the higher
training and ambition of our brighter minds,--so far as he, the South,
or the Nation, does this,--we must unceasingly and firmly oppose them.
By every civilized and peaceful method we must strive for the rights
which the world accords to men, clinging unwaveringly to those great
words which the sons of the Fathers would fain forget: "We hold these
truths to be self-evident: That all men are created equal; that they
are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights; that
among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness."




IV

Of the Meaning of Progress

  Willst Du Deine Macht verkunden,
  Wahle sie die frei von Sunden,
  Steh'n in Deinem ew'gen Haus!
  Deine Geister sende aus!
  Die Unsterblichen, die Reinen,
  Die nicht fuhlen, die nicht weinen!
  Nicht die zarte Jungfrau wahle,
  Nicht der Hirtin weiche Seele!

  SCHILLER.


Once upon a time I taught school in the hills of Tennessee, where the
broad dark vale of the Mississippi begins to roll and crumple to greet
the Alleghanies.  I was a Fisk student then, and all Fisk men thought
that Tennessee--beyond the Veil--was theirs alone, and in vacation time
they sallied forth in lusty bands to meet the county
school-commissioners.  Young and happy, I too went, and I shall not
soon forget that summer, seventeen years ago.

First, there was a Teachers' Institute at the county-seat; and there
distinguished guests of the superintendent taught the teachers
fractions and spelling and other mysteries,--white teachers in the
morning, Negroes at night.  A picnic now and then, and a supper, and
the rough world was softened by laughter and song.  I remember how--
But I wander.

There came a day when all the teachers left the Institute and began the
hunt for schools.  I learn from hearsay (for my mother was mortally
afraid of firearms) that the hunting of ducks and bears and men is
wonderfully interesting, but I am sure that the man who has never
hunted a country school has something to learn of the pleasures of the
chase.  I see now the white, hot roads lazily rise and fall and wind
before me under the burning July sun; I feel the deep weariness of
heart and limb as ten, eight, six miles stretch relentlessly ahead; I
feel my heart sink heavily as I hear again and again, "Got a teacher?
Yes."  So I walked on and on--horses were too expensive--until I had
wandered beyond railways, beyond stage lines, to a land of "varmints"
and rattlesnakes, where the coming of a stranger was an event, and men
lived and died in the shadow of one blue hill.

Sprinkled over hill and dale lay cabins and farmhouses, shut out from
the world by the forests and the rolling hills toward the east.  There
I found at last a little school.  Josie told me of it; she was a thin,
homely girl of twenty, with a dark-brown face and thick, hard hair.  I
had crossed the stream at Watertown, and rested under the great
willows; then I had gone to the little cabin in the lot where Josie was
resting on her way to town.  The gaunt farmer made me welcome, and
Josie, hearing my errand, told me anxiously that they wanted a school
over the hill; that but once since the war had a teacher been there;
that she herself longed to learn,--and thus she ran on, talking fast
and loud, with much earnestness and energy.

Next morning I crossed the tall round hill, lingered to look at the
blue and yellow mountains stretching toward the Carolinas, then plunged
into the wood, and came out at Josie's home.  It was a dull frame
cottage with four rooms, perched just below the brow of the hill, amid
peach-trees.  The father was a quiet, simple soul, calmly ignorant,
with no touch of vulgarity.  The mother was different,--strong,
bustling, and energetic, with a quick, restless tongue, and an ambition
to live "like folks." There was a crowd of children.  Two boys had gone
away.  There remained two growing girls; a shy midget of eight; John,
tall, awkward, and eighteen; Jim, younger, quicker, and better looking;
and two babies of indefinite age.  Then there was Josie herself.  She
seemed to be the centre of the family: always busy at service, or at
home, or berry-picking; a little nervous and inclined to scold, like
her mother, yet faithful, too, like her father.  She had about her a
certain fineness, the shadow of an unconscious moral heroism that would
willingly give all of life to make life broader, deeper, and fuller for
her and hers.  I saw much of this family afterwards, and grew to love
them for their honest efforts to be decent and comfortable, and for
their knowledge of their own ignorance.  There was with them no
affectation.  The mother would scold the father for being so "easy";
Josie would roundly berate the boys for carelessness; and all knew that
it was a hard thing to dig a living out of a rocky side-hill.

I secured the school.  I remember the day I rode horseback out to the
commissioner's house with a pleasant young white fellow who wanted the
white school.  The road ran down the bed of a stream; the sun laughed
and the water jingled, and we rode on.  "Come in," said the
commissioner,--"come in.  Have a seat.  Yes, that certificate will do.
Stay to dinner.  What do you want a month?"  "Oh," thought I, "this is
lucky"; but even then fell the awful shadow of the Veil, for they ate
first, then I--alone.

The schoolhouse was a log hut, where Colonel Wheeler used to shelter
his corn.  It sat in a lot behind a rail fence and thorn bushes, near
the sweetest of springs.  There was an entrance where a door once was,
and within, a massive rickety fireplace; great chinks between the logs
served as windows.  Furniture was scarce.  A pale blackboard crouched
in the corner.  My desk was made of three boards, reinforced at
critical points, and my chair, borrowed from the landlady, had to be
returned every night.  Seats for the children--these puzzled me much.
I was haunted by a New England vision of neat little desks and chairs,
but, alas! the reality was rough plank benches without backs, and at
times without legs.  They had the one virtue of making naps
dangerous,--possibly fatal, for the floor was not to be trusted.

It was a hot morning late in July when the school opened.  I trembled
when I heard the patter of little feet down the dusty road, and saw the
growing row of dark solemn faces and bright eager eyes facing me.
First came Josie and her brothers and sisters.  The longing to know, to
be a student in the great school at Nashville, hovered like a star
above this child-woman amid her work and worry, and she studied
doggedly.  There were the Dowells from their farm over toward
Alexandria,--Fanny, with her smooth black face and wondering eyes;
Martha, brown and dull; the pretty girl-wife of a brother, and the
younger brood.

There were the Burkes,--two brown and yellow lads, and a tiny
haughty-eyed girl.  Fat Reuben's little chubby girl came, with golden
face and old-gold hair, faithful and solemn.  'Thenie was on hand
early,--a jolly, ugly, good-hearted girl, who slyly dipped snuff and
looked after her little bow-legged brother.  When her mother could
spare her, 'Tildy came,--a midnight beauty, with starry eyes and
tapering limbs; and her brother, correspondingly homely.  And then the
big boys,--the hulking Lawrences; the lazy Neills, unfathered sons of
mother and daughter; Hickman, with a stoop in his shoulders; and the
rest.

There they sat, nearly thirty of them, on the rough benches, their
faces shading from a pale cream to a deep brown, the little feet bare
and swinging, the eyes full of expectation, with here and there a
twinkle of mischief, and the hands grasping Webster's blue-black
spelling-book.  I loved my school, and the fine faith the children had
in the wisdom of their teacher was truly marvellous.  We read and
spelled together, wrote a little, picked flowers, sang, and listened to
stories of the world beyond the hill.  At times the school would
dwindle away, and I would start out.  I would visit Mun Eddings, who
lived in two very dirty rooms, and ask why little Lugene, whose flaming
face seemed ever ablaze with the dark-red hair uncombed, was absent all
last week, or why I missed so often the inimitable rags of Mack and Ed.
Then the father, who worked Colonel Wheeler's farm on shares, would
tell me how the crops needed the boys; and the thin, slovenly mother,
whose face was pretty when washed, assured me that Lugene must mind the
baby.  "But we'll start them again next week."  When the Lawrences
stopped, I knew that the doubts of the old folks about book-learning
had conquered again, and so, toiling up the hill, and getting as far
into the cabin as possible, I put Cicero "pro Archia Poeta" into the
simplest English with local applications, and usually convinced
them--for a week or so.

On Friday nights I often went home with some of the
children,--sometimes to Doc Burke's farm.  He was a great, loud, thin
Black, ever working, and trying to buy the seventy-five acres of hill
and dale where he lived; but people said that he would surely fail, and
the "white folks would get it all."  His wife was a magnificent Amazon,
with saffron face and shining hair, uncorseted and barefooted, and the
children were strong and beautiful.  They lived in a
one-and-a-half-room cabin in the hollow of the farm, near the spring.
The front room was full of great fat white beds, scrupulously neat; and
there were bad chromos on the walls, and a tired centre-table.  In the
tiny back kitchen I was often invited to "take out and help" myself to
fried chicken and wheat biscuit, "meat" and corn pone, string-beans and
berries.  At first I used to be a little alarmed at the approach of
bedtime in the one lone bedroom, but embarrassment was very deftly
avoided.  First, all the children nodded and slept, and were stowed
away in one great pile of goose feathers; next, the mother and the
father discreetly slipped away to the kitchen while I went to bed;
then, blowing out the dim light, they retired in the dark.  In the
morning all were up and away before I thought of awaking.  Across the
road, where fat Reuben lived, they all went outdoors while the teacher
retired, because they did not boast the luxury of a kitchen.

I liked to stay with the Dowells, for they had four rooms and plenty of
good country fare.  Uncle Bird had a small, rough farm, all woods and
hills, miles from the big road; but he was full of tales,--he preached
now and then,--and with his children, berries, horses, and wheat he was
happy and prosperous.  Often, to keep the peace, I must go where life
was less lovely; for instance, 'Tildy's mother was incorrigibly dirty,
Reuben's larder was limited seriously, and herds of untamed insects
wandered over the Eddingses' beds.  Best of all I loved to go to
Josie's, and sit on the porch, eating peaches, while the mother bustled
and talked: how Josie had bought the sewing-machine; how Josie worked
at service in winter, but that four dollars a month was "mighty little"
wages; how Josie longed to go away to school, but that it "looked like"
they never could get far enough ahead to let her; how the crops failed
and the well was yet unfinished; and, finally, how "mean" some of the
white folks were.

For two summers I lived in this little world; it was dull and humdrum.
The girls looked at the hill in wistful longing, and the boys fretted
and haunted Alexandria.  Alexandria was "town,"--a straggling, lazy
village of houses, churches, and shops, and an aristocracy of Toms,
Dicks, and Captains.  Cuddled on the hill to the north was the village
of the colored folks, who lived in three- or four-room unpainted
cottages, some neat and homelike, and some dirty.  The dwellings were
scattered rather aimlessly, but they centred about the twin temples of
the hamlet, the Methodist, and the Hard-Shell Baptist churches.  These,
in turn, leaned gingerly on a sad-colored schoolhouse.  Hither my
little world wended its crooked way on Sunday to meet other worlds, and
gossip, and wonder, and make the weekly sacrifice with frenzied priest
at the altar of the "old-time religion."  Then the soft melody and
mighty cadences of Negro song fluttered and thundered.

I have called my tiny community a world, and so its isolation made it;
and yet there was among us but a half-awakened common consciousness,
sprung from common joy and grief, at burial, birth, or wedding; from a
common hardship in poverty, poor land, and low wages; and, above all,
from the sight of the Veil that hung between us and Opportunity.  All
this caused us to think some thoughts together; but these, when ripe
for speech, were spoken in various languages.  Those whose eyes
twenty-five and more years before had seen "the glory of the coming of
the Lord," saw in every present hindrance or help a dark fatalism bound
to bring all things right in His own good time.  The mass of those to
whom slavery was a dim recollection of childhood found the world a
puzzling thing: it asked little of them, and they answered with little,
and yet it ridiculed their offering.  Such a paradox they could not
understand, and therefore sank into listless indifference, or
shiftlessness, or reckless bravado.  There were, however, some--such as
Josie, Jim, and Ben--to whom War, Hell, and Slavery were but childhood
tales, whose young appetites had been whetted to an edge by school and
story and half-awakened thought.  Ill could they be content, born
without and beyond the World.  And their weak wings beat against their
barriers,--barriers of caste, of youth, of life; at last, in dangerous
moments, against everything that opposed even a whim.


The ten years that follow youth, the years when first the realization
comes that life is leading somewhere,--these were the years that passed
after I left my little school.  When they were past, I came by chance
once more to the walls of Fisk University, to the halls of the chapel
of melody.  As I lingered there in the joy and pain of meeting old
school-friends, there swept over me a sudden longing to pass again
beyond the blue hill, and to see the homes and the school of other
days, and to learn how life had gone with my school-children; and I
went.

Josie was dead, and the gray-haired mother said simply, "We've had a
heap of trouble since you've been away."  I had feared for Jim.  With a
cultured parentage and a social caste to uphold him, he might have made
a venturesome merchant or a West Point cadet.  But here he was, angry
with life and reckless; and when Fanner Durham charged him with
stealing wheat, the old man had to ride fast to escape the stones which
the furious fool hurled after him.  They told Jim to run away; but he
would not run, and the constable came that afternoon.  It grieved
Josie, and great awkward John walked nine miles every day to see his
little brother through the bars of Lebanon jail.  At last the two came
back together in the dark night.  The mother cooked supper, and Josie
emptied her purse, and the boys stole away.  Josie grew thin and
silent, yet worked the more.  The hill became steep for the quiet old
father, and with the boys away there was little to do in the valley.
Josie helped them to sell the old farm, and they moved nearer town.
Brother Dennis, the carpenter, built a new house with six rooms; Josie
toiled a year in Nashville, and brought back ninety dollars to furnish
the house and change it to a home.

When the spring came, and the birds twittered, and the stream ran proud
and full, little sister Lizzie, bold and thoughtless, flushed with the
passion of youth, bestowed herself on the tempter, and brought home a
nameless child.  Josie shivered and worked on, with the vision of
schooldays all fled, with a face wan and tired,--worked until, on a
summer's day, some one married another; then Josie crept to her mother
like a hurt child, and slept--and sleeps.

I paused to scent the breeze as I entered the valley.  The Lawrences
have gone,--father and son forever,--and the other son lazily digs in
the earth to live.  A new young widow rents out their cabin to fat
Reuben.  Reuben is a Baptist preacher now, but I fear as lazy as ever,
though his cabin has three rooms; and little Ella has grown into a
bouncing woman, and is ploughing corn on the hot hillside.  There are
babies a-plenty, and one half-witted girl.  Across the valley is a
house I did not know before, and there I found, rocking one baby and
expecting another, one of my schoolgirls, a daughter of Uncle Bird
Dowell.  She looked somewhat worried with her new duties, but soon
bristled into pride over her neat cabin and the tale of her thrifty
husband, and the horse and cow, and the farm they were planning to buy.

My log schoolhouse was gone.  In its place stood Progress; and
Progress, I understand, is necessarily ugly.  The crazy foundation
stones still marked the former site of my poor little cabin, and not
far away, on six weary boulders, perched a jaunty board house, perhaps
twenty by thirty feet, with three windows and a door that locked.  Some
of the window-glass was broken, and part of an old iron stove lay
mournfully under the house.  I peeped through the window half
reverently, and found things that were more familiar.  The blackboard
had grown by about two feet, and the seats were still without backs.
The county owns the lot now, I hear, and every year there is a session
of school.  As I sat by the spring and looked on the Old and the New I
felt glad, very glad, and yet--

After two long drinks I started on.  There was the great double
log-house on the corner.  I remembered the broken, blighted family that
used to live there.  The strong, hard face of the mother, with its
wilderness of hair, rose before me.  She had driven her husband away,
and while I taught school a strange man lived there, big and jovial,
and people talked.  I felt sure that Ben and 'Tildy would come to
naught from such a home.  But this is an odd world; for Ben is a busy
farmer in Smith County, "doing well, too," they say, and he had cared
for little 'Tildy until last spring, when a lover married her.  A hard
life the lad had led, toiling for meat, and laughed at because he was
homely and crooked.  There was Sam Carlon, an impudent old skinflint,
who had definite notions about "niggers," and hired Ben a summer and
would not pay him.  Then the hungry boy gathered his sacks together,
and in broad daylight went into Carlon's corn; and when the hard-fisted
farmer set upon him, the angry boy flew at him like a beast.  Doc Burke
saved a murder and a lynching that day.

The story reminded me again of the Burkes, and an impatience seized me
to know who won in the battle, Doc or the seventy-five acres.  For it
is a hard thing to make a farm out of nothing, even in fifteen years.
So I hurried on, thinking of the Burkes.  They used to have a certain
magnificent barbarism about them that I liked.  They were never vulgar,
never immoral, but rather rough and primitive, with an
unconventionality that spent itself in loud guffaws, slaps on the back,
and naps in the corner.  I hurried by the cottage of the misborn Neill
boys.  It was empty, and they were grown into fat, lazy farm-hands.  I
saw the home of the Hickmans, but Albert, with his stooping shoulders,
had passed from the world.  Then I came to the Burkes' gate and peered
through; the enclosure looked rough and untrimmed, and yet there were
the same fences around the old farm save to the left, where lay
twenty-five other acres.  And lo! the cabin in the hollow had climbed
the hill and swollen to a half-finished six-room cottage.

The Burkes held a hundred acres, but they were still in debt.  Indeed,
the gaunt father who toiled night and day would scarcely be happy out
of debt, being so used to it.  Some day he must stop, for his massive
frame is showing decline.  The mother wore shoes, but the lion-like
physique of other days was broken.  The children had grown up.  Rob,
the image of his father, was loud and rough with laughter.  Birdie, my
school baby of six, had grown to a picture of maiden beauty, tall and
tawny.  "Edgar is gone," said the mother, with head half bowed,--"gone
to work in Nashville; he and his father couldn't agree."

Little Doc, the boy born since the time of my school, took me horseback
down the creek next morning toward Farmer Dowell's.  The road and the
stream were battling for mastery, and the stream had the better of it.
We splashed and waded, and the merry boy, perched behind me, chattered
and laughed.  He showed me where Simon Thompson had bought a bit of
ground and a home; but his daughter Lana, a plump, brown, slow girl,
was not there.  She had married a man and a farm twenty miles away.  We
wound on down the stream till we came to a gate that I did not
recognize, but the boy insisted that it was "Uncle Bird's."  The farm
was fat with the growing crop.  In that little valley was a strange
stillness as I rode up; for death and marriage had stolen youth and
left age and childhood there.  We sat and talked that night after the
chores were done.  Uncle Bird was grayer, and his eyes did not see so
well, but he was still jovial.  We talked of the acres bought,--one
hundred and twenty-five,--of the new guest-chamber added, of Martha's
marrying.  Then we talked of death: Fanny and Fred were gone; a shadow
hung over the other daughter, and when it lifted she was to go to
Nashville to school.  At last we spoke of the neighbors, and as night
fell, Uncle Bird told me how, on a night like that, 'Thenie came
wandering back to her home over yonder, to escape the blows of her
husband.  And next morning she died in the home that her little
bow-legged brother, working and saving, had bought for their widowed
mother.

My journey was done, and behind me lay hill and dale, and Life and
Death.  How shall man measure Progress there where the dark-faced Josie
lies?  How many heartfuls of sorrow shall balance a bushel of wheat?
How hard a thing is life to the lowly, and yet how human and real!  And
all this life and love and strife and failure,--is it the twilight of
nightfall or the flush of some faint-dawning day?

Thus sadly musing, I rode to Nashville in the Jim Crow car.




V

Of the Wings of Atalanta

  O black boy of Atlanta!
    But half was spoken;
  The slave's chains and the master's
    Alike are broken;
  The one curse of the races
    Held both in tether;
  They are rising--all are rising--
    The black and white together.

  WHITTIER.


South of the North, yet north of the South, lies the City of a Hundred
Hills, peering out from the shadows of the past into the promise of the
future.  I have seen her in the morning, when the first flush of day
had half-roused her; she lay gray and still on the crimson soil of
Georgia; then the blue smoke began to curl from her chimneys, the
tinkle of bell and scream of whistle broke the silence, the rattle and
roar of busy life slowly gathered and swelled, until the seething whirl
of the city seemed a strange thing in a sleepy land.

Once, they say, even Atlanta slept dull and drowsy at the foot-hills of
the Alleghanies, until the iron baptism of war awakened her with its
sullen waters, aroused and maddened her, and left her listening to the
sea.  And the sea cried to the hills and the hills answered the sea,
till the city rose like a widow and cast away her weeds, and toiled for
her daily bread; toiled steadily, toiled cunningly,--perhaps with some
bitterness, with a touch, of reclame,--and yet with real earnestness,
and real sweat.

It is a hard thing to live haunted by the ghost of an untrue dream; to
see the wide vision of empire fade into real ashes and dirt; to feel
the pang of the conquered, and yet know that with all the Bad that fell
on one black day, something was vanquished that deserved to live,
something killed that in justice had not dared to die; to know that
with the Right that triumphed, triumphed something of Wrong, something
sordid and mean, something less than the broadest and best.  All this
is bitter hard; and many a man and city and people have found in it
excuse for sulking, and brooding, and listless waiting.

Such are not men of the sturdier make; they of Atlanta turned
resolutely toward the future; and that future held aloft vistas of
purple and gold:--Atlanta, Queen of the cotton kingdom; Atlanta,
Gateway to the Land of the Sun; Atlanta, the new Lachesis, spinner of
web and woof for the world.  So the city crowned her hundred hills with
factories, and stored her shops with cunning handiwork, and stretched
long iron ways to greet the busy Mercury in his coming.  And the Nation
talked of her striving.


Perhaps Atlanta was not christened for the winged maiden of dull
Boeotia; you know the tale,--how swarthy Atalanta, tall and wild, would
marry only him who out-raced her; and how the wily Hippomenes laid
three apples of gold in the way.  She fled like a shadow, paused,
startled over the first apple, but even as he stretched his hand, fled
again; hovered over the second, then, slipping from his hot grasp, flew
over river, vale, and hill; but as she lingered over the third, his
arms fell round her, and looking on each other, the blazing passion of
their love profaned the sanctuary of Love, and they were cursed.  If
Atlanta be not named for Atalanta, she ought to have been.

Atalanta is not the first or the last maiden whom greed of gold has led
to defile the temple of Love; and not maids alone, but men in the race
of life, sink from the high and generous ideals of youth to the
gambler's code of the Bourse; and in all our Nation's striving is not
the Gospel of Work befouled by the Gospel of Pay?  So common is this
that one-half think it normal; so unquestioned, that we almost fear to
question if the end of racing is not gold, if the aim of man is not
rightly to be rich.  And if this is the fault of America, how dire a
danger lies before a new land and a new city, lest Atlanta, stooping
for mere gold, shall find that gold accursed!

It was no maiden's idle whim that started this hard racing; a fearful
wilderness lay about the feet of that city after the War,--feudalism,
poverty, the rise of the Third Estate, serfdom, the re-birth of Law and
Order, and above and between all, the Veil of Race.  How heavy a
journey for weary feet!  what wings must Atalanta have to flit over all
this hollow and hill, through sour wood and sullen water, and by the
red waste of sun-baked clay!  How fleet must Atalanta be if she will
not be tempted by gold to profane the Sanctuary!

The Sanctuary of our fathers has, to be sure, few Gods,--some sneer,
"all too few."  There is the thrifty Mercury of New England, Pluto of
the North, and Ceres of the West; and there, too, is the half-forgotten
Apollo of the South, under whose aegis the maiden ran,--and as she ran
she forgot him, even as there in Boeotia Venus was forgot.  She forgot
the old ideal of the Southern gentleman,--that new-world heir of the
grace and courtliness of patrician, knight, and noble; forgot his honor
with his foibles, his kindliness with his carelessness, and stooped to
apples of gold,--to men busier and sharper, thriftier and more
unscrupulous.  Golden apples are beautiful--I remember the lawless days
of boyhood, when orchards in crimson and gold tempted me over fence and
field--and, too, the merchant who has dethroned the planter is no
despicable parvenu.  Work and wealth are the mighty levers to lift this
old new land; thrift and toil and saving are the highways to new hopes
and new possibilities; and yet the warning is needed lest the wily
Hippomenes tempt Atalanta to thinking that golden apples are the goal
of racing, and not mere incidents by the way.

Atlanta must not lead the South to dream of material prosperity as the
touchstone of all success; already the fatal might of this idea is
beginning to spread; it is replacing the finer type of Southerner with
vulgar money-getters; it is burying the sweeter beauties of Southern
life beneath pretence and ostentation.  For every social ill the
panacea of Wealth has been urged,--wealth to overthrow the remains of
the slave feudalism; wealth to raise the "cracker" Third Estate; wealth
to employ the black serfs, and the prospect of wealth to keep them
working; wealth as the end and aim of politics, and as the legal tender
for law and order; and, finally, instead of Truth, Beauty, and
Goodness, wealth as the ideal of the Public School.

Not only is this true in the world which Atlanta typifies, but it is
threatening to be true of a world beneath and beyond that world,--the
Black World beyond the Veil.  Today it makes little difference to
Atlanta, to the South, what the Negro thinks or dreams or wills.  In
the soul-life of the land he is to-day, and naturally will long remain,
unthought of, half forgotten; and yet when he does come to think and
will and do for himself,--and let no man dream that day will never
come,--then the part he plays will not be one of sudden learning, but
words and thoughts he has been taught to lisp in his race-childhood.
To-day the ferment of his striving toward self-realization is to the
strife of the white world like a wheel within a wheel: beyond the Veil
are smaller but like problems of ideals, of leaders and the led, of
serfdom, of poverty, of order and subordination, and, through all, the
Veil of Race.  Few know of these problems, few who know notice them;
and yet there they are, awaiting student, artist, and seer,--a field
for somebody sometime to discover.  Hither has the temptation of
Hippomenes penetrated; already in this smaller world, which now
indirectly and anon directly must influence the larger for good or ill,
the habit is forming of interpreting the world in dollars.  The old
leaders of Negro opinion, in the little groups where there is a Negro
social consciousness, are being replaced by new; neither the black
preacher nor the black teacher leads as he did two decades ago.  Into
their places are pushing the farmers and gardeners, the well-paid
porters and artisans, the business-men,--all those with property and
money.  And with all this change, so curiously parallel to that of the
Other-world, goes too the same inevitable change in ideals.  The South
laments to-day the slow, steady disappearance of a certain type of
Negro,--the faithful, courteous slave of other days, with his
incorruptible honesty and dignified humility.  He is passing away just
as surely as the old type of Southern gentleman is passing, and from
not dissimilar causes,--the sudden transformation of a fair far-off
ideal of Freedom into the hard reality of bread-winning and the
consequent deification of Bread.

In the Black World, the Preacher and Teacher embodied once the ideals
of this people--the strife for another and a juster world, the vague
dream of righteousness, the mystery of knowing; but to-day the danger
is that these ideals, with their simple beauty and weird inspiration,
will suddenly sink to a question of cash and a lust for gold.  Here
stands this black young Atalanta, girding herself for the race that
must be run; and if her eyes be still toward the hills and sky as in
the days of old, then we may look for noble running; but what if some
ruthless or wily or even thoughtless Hippomenes lay golden apples
before her?  What if the Negro people be wooed from a strife for
righteousness, from a love of knowing, to regard dollars as the be-all
and end-all of life?  What if to the Mammonism of America be added the
rising Mammonism of the re-born South, and the Mammonism of this South
be reinforced by the budding Mammonism of its half-wakened black
millions?  Whither, then, is the new-world quest of Goodness and Beauty
and Truth gone glimmering?  Must this, and that fair flower of Freedom
which, despite the jeers of latter-day striplings, sprung from our
fathers' blood, must that too degenerate into a dusty quest of
gold,--into lawless lust with Hippomenes?


The hundred hills of Atlanta are not all crowned with factories.  On
one, toward the west, the setting sun throws three buildings in bold
relief against the sky.  The beauty of the group lies in its simple
unity:--a broad lawn of green rising from the red street and mingled
roses and peaches; north and south, two plain and stately halls; and in
the midst, half hidden in ivy, a larger building, boldly graceful,
sparingly decorated, and with one low spire.  It is a restful group,
--one never looks for more; it is all here, all intelligible.  There I
live, and there I hear from day to day the low hum of restful life.  In
winter's twilight, when the red sun glows, I can see the dark figures
pass between the halls to the music of the night-bell.  In the morning,
when the sun is golden, the clang of the day-bell brings the hurry and
laughter of three hundred young hearts from hall and street, and from
the busy city below,--children all dark and heavy-haired,--to join
their clear young voices in the music of the morning sacrifice.  In a
half-dozen class-rooms they gather then,--here to follow the love-song
of Dido, here to listen to the tale of Troy divine; there to wander
among the stars, there to wander among men and nations,--and elsewhere
other well-worn ways of knowing this queer world.  Nothing new, no
time-saving devices,--simply old time-glorified methods of delving for
Truth, and searching out the hidden beauties of life, and learning the
good of living.  The riddle of existence is the college curriculum that
was laid before the Pharaohs, that was taught in the groves by Plato,
that formed the trivium and quadrivium, and is to-day laid before the
freedmen's sons by Atlanta University.  And this course of study will
not change; its methods will grow more deft and effectual, its content
richer by toil of scholar and sight of seer; but the true college will
ever have one goal,--not to earn meat, but to know the end and aim of
that life which meat nourishes.

The vision of life that rises before these dark eyes has in it nothing
mean or selfish.  Not at Oxford or at Leipsic, not at Yale or Columbia,
is there an air of higher resolve or more unfettered striving; the
determination to realize for men, both black and white, the broadest
possibilities of life, to seek the better and the best, to spread with
their own hands the Gospel of Sacrifice,--all this is the burden of
their talk and dream.  Here, amid a wide desert of caste and
proscription, amid the heart-hurting slights and jars and vagaries of a
deep race-dislike, lies this green oasis, where hot anger cools, and
the bitterness of disappointment is sweetened by the springs and
breezes of Parnassus; and here men may lie and listen, and learn of a
future fuller than the past, and hear the voice of Time:

  "Entbehren sollst du, sollst entbehren."


They made their mistakes, those who planted Fisk and Howard and Atlanta
before the smoke of battle had lifted; they made their mistakes, but
those mistakes were not the things at which we lately laughed somewhat
uproariously.  They were right when they sought to found a new
educational system upon the University: where, forsooth, shall we
ground knowledge save on the broadest and deepest knowledge?  The roots
of the tree, rather than the leaves, are the sources of its life; and
from the dawn of history, from Academus to Cambridge, the culture of
the University has been the broad foundation-stone on which is built
the kindergarten's A B C.

But these builders did make a mistake in minimizing the gravity of the
problem before them; in thinking it a matter of years and decades; in
therefore building quickly and laying their foundation carelessly, and
lowering the standard of knowing, until they had scattered haphazard
through the South some dozen poorly equipped high schools and miscalled
them universities.  They forgot, too, just as their successors are
forgetting, the rule of inequality:--that of the million black youth,
some were fitted to know and some to dig; that some had the talent and
capacity of university men, and some the talent and capacity of
blacksmiths; and that true training meant neither that all should be
college men nor all artisans, but that the one should be made a
missionary of culture to an untaught people, and the other a free
workman among serfs.  And to seek to make the blacksmith a scholar is
almost as silly as the more modern scheme of making the scholar a
blacksmith; almost, but not quite.


The function of the university is not simply to teach bread-winning, or
to furnish teachers for the public schools or to be a centre of polite
society; it is, above all, to be the organ of that fine adjustment
between real life and the growing knowledge of life, an adjustment
which forms the secret of civilization.  Such an institution the South
of to-day sorely needs.  She has religion, earnest, bigoted:--religion
that on both sides the Veil often omits the sixth, seventh, and eighth
commandments, but substitutes a dozen supplementary ones.  She has, as
Atlanta shows, growing thrift and love of toil; but she lacks that
broad knowledge of what the world knows and knew of human living and
doing, which she may apply to the thousand problems of real life to-day
confronting her.  The need of the South is knowledge and culture,--not
in dainty limited quantity, as before the war, but in broad busy
abundance in the world of work; and until she has this, not all the
Apples of Hesperides, be they golden and bejewelled, can save her from
the curse of the Boeotian lovers.

The Wings of Atalanta are the coming universities of the South.  They
alone can bear the maiden past the temptation of golden fruit.  They
will not guide her flying feet away from the cotton and gold; for--ah,
thoughtful Hippomenes!--do not the apples lie in the very Way of Life?
But they will guide her over and beyond them, and leave her kneeling in
the Sanctuary of Truth and Freedom and broad Humanity, virgin and
undefiled.  Sadly did the Old South err in human education, despising
the education of the masses, and niggardly in the support of colleges.
Her ancient university foundations dwindled and withered under the foul
breath of slavery; and even since the war they have fought a failing
fight for life in the tainted air of social unrest and commercial
selfishness, stunted by the death of criticism, and starving for lack
of broadly cultured men.  And if this is the white South's need and
danger, how much heavier the danger and need of the freedmen's sons!
how pressing here the need of broad ideals and true culture, the
conservation of soul from sordid aims and petty passions!  Let us build
the Southern university--William and Mary, Trinity, Georgia, Texas,
Tulane, Vanderbilt, and the others--fit to live; let us build, too, the
Negro universities:--Fisk, whose foundation was ever broad; Howard, at
the heart of the Nation; Atlanta at Atlanta, whose ideal of scholarship
has been held above the temptation of numbers.  Why not here, and
perhaps elsewhere, plant deeply and for all time centres of learning
and living, colleges that yearly would send into the life of the South
a few white men and a few black men of broad culture, catholic
tolerance, and trained ability, joining their hands to other hands, and
giving to this squabble of the Races a decent and dignified peace?

Patience, Humility, Manners, and Taste, common schools and
kindergartens, industrial and technical schools, literature and
tolerance,--all these spring from knowledge and culture, the children
of the university.  So must men and nations build, not otherwise, not
upside down.

Teach workers to work,--a wise saying; wise when applied to German boys
and American girls; wiser when said of Negro boys, for they have less
knowledge of working and none to teach them.  Teach thinkers to
think,--a needed knowledge in a day of loose and careless logic; and
they whose lot is gravest must have the carefulest training to think
aright.  If these things are so, how foolish to ask what is the best
education for one or seven or sixty million souls! shall we teach them
trades, or train them in liberal arts?  Neither and both: teach the
workers to work and the thinkers to think; make carpenters of
carpenters, and philosophers of philosophers, and fops of fools.  Nor
can we pause here.  We are training not isolated men but a living group
of men,--nay, a group within a group.  And the final product of our
training must be neither a psychologist nor a brickmason, but a man.
And to make men, we must have ideals, broad, pure, and inspiring ends
of living,--not sordid money-getting, not apples of gold.  The worker
must work for the glory of his handiwork, not simply for pay; the
thinker must think for truth, not for fame.  And all this is gained
only by human strife and longing; by ceaseless training and education;
by founding Right on righteousness and Truth on the unhampered search
for Truth; by founding the common school on the university, and the
industrial school on the common school; and weaving thus a system, not
a distortion, and bringing a birth, not an abortion.


When night falls on the City of a Hundred Hills, a wind gathers itself
from the seas and comes murmuring westward.  And at its bidding, the
smoke of the drowsy factories sweeps down upon the mighty city and
covers it like a pall, while yonder at the University the stars twinkle
above Stone Hall.  And they say that yon gray mist is the tunic of
Atalanta pausing over her golden apples.  Fly, my maiden, fly, for
yonder comes Hippomenes!




VI

Of the Training of Black Men

  Why, if the Soul can fling the Dust aside,
  And naked on the Air of Heaven ride,
    Were't not a Shame--were't not a Shame for him
  In this clay carcase crippled to abide?

  OMAR KHAYYAM (FITZGERALD).


From the shimmering swirl of waters where many, many thoughts ago the
slave-ship first saw the square tower of Jamestown, have flowed down to
our day three streams of thinking: one swollen from the larger world
here and overseas, saying, the multiplying of human wants in
culture-lands calls for the world-wide cooperation of men in satisfying
them.  Hence arises a new human unity, pulling the ends of earth
nearer, and all men, black, yellow, and white.  The larger humanity
strives to feel in this contact of living Nations and sleeping hordes a
thrill of new life in the world, crying, "If the contact of Life and
Sleep be Death, shame on such Life."  To be sure, behind this thought
lurks the afterthought of force and dominion,--the making of brown men
to delve when the temptation of beads and red calico cloys.

The second thought streaming from the death-ship and the curving river
is the thought of the older South,--the sincere and passionate belief
that somewhere between men and cattle, God created a tertium quid, and
called it a Negro,--a clownish, simple creature, at times even lovable
within its limitations, but straitly foreordained to walk within the
Veil.  To be sure, behind the thought lurks the afterthought,--some of
them with favoring chance might become men, but in sheer self-defence
we dare not let them, and we build about them walls so high, and hang
between them and the light a veil so thick, that they shall not even
think of breaking through.

And last of all there trickles down that third and darker thought,--the
thought of the things themselves, the confused, half-conscious mutter
of men who are black and whitened, crying "Liberty, Freedom,
Opportunity--vouchsafe to us, O boastful World, the chance of living
men!"  To be sure, behind the thought lurks the afterthought,--suppose,
after all, the World is right and we are less than men?  Suppose this
mad impulse within is all wrong, some mock mirage from the untrue?

So here we stand among thoughts of human unity, even through conquest
and slavery; the inferiority of black men, even if forced by fraud; a
shriek in the night for the freedom of men who themselves are not yet
sure of their right to demand it.  This is the tangle of thought and
afterthought wherein we are called to solve the problem of training men
for life.

Behind all its curiousness, so attractive alike to sage and dilettante,
lie its dim dangers, throwing across us shadows at once grotesque and
awful.  Plain it is to us that what the world seeks through desert and
wild we have within our threshold,--a stalwart laboring force, suited
to the semi-tropics; if, deaf to the voice of the Zeitgeist, we refuse
to use and develop these men, we risk poverty and loss.  If, on the
other hand, seized by the brutal afterthought, we debauch the race thus
caught in our talons, selfishly sucking their blood and brains in the
future as in the past, what shall save us from national decadence?
Only that saner selfishness, which Education teaches, can find the
rights of all in the whirl of work.

Again, we may decry the color-prejudice of the South, yet it remains a
heavy fact.  Such curious kinks of the human mind exist and must be
reckoned with soberly.  They cannot be laughed away, nor always
successfully stormed at, nor easily abolished by act of legislature.
And yet they must not be encouraged by being let alone.  They must be
recognized as facts, but unpleasant facts; things that stand in the way
of civilization and religion and common decency.  They can be met in
but one way,--by the breadth and broadening of human reason, by
catholicity of taste and culture.  And so, too, the native ambition and
aspiration of men, even though they be black, backward, and ungraceful,
must not lightly be dealt with.  To stimulate wildly weak and untrained
minds is to play with mighty fires; to flout their striving idly is to
welcome a harvest of brutish crime and shameless lethargy in our very
laps.  The guiding of thought and the deft coordination of deed is at
once the path of honor and humanity.

And so, in this great question of reconciling three vast and partially
contradictory streams of thought, the one panacea of Education leaps to
the lips of all:--such human training as will best use the labor of all
men without enslaving or brutalizing; such training as will give us
poise to encourage the prejudices that bulwark society, and to stamp
out those that in sheer barbarity deafen us to the wail of prisoned
souls within the Veil, and the mounting fury of shackled men.

But when we have vaguely said that Education will set this tangle
straight, what have we uttered but a truism?  Training for life teaches
living; but what training for the profitable living together of black
men and white?  A hundred and fifty years ago our task would have
seemed easier.  Then Dr. Johnson blandly assured us that education was
needful solely for the embellishments of life, and was useless for
ordinary vermin.  To-day we have climbed to heights where we would open
at least the outer courts of knowledge to all, display its treasures to
many, and select the few to whom its mystery of Truth is revealed, not
wholly by birth or the accidents of the stock market, but at least in
part according to deftness and aim, talent and character.  This
programme, however, we are sorely puzzled in carrying out through that
part of the land where the blight of slavery fell hardest, and where we
are dealing with two backward peoples.  To make here in human education
that ever necessary combination of the permanent and the contingent--of
the ideal and the practical in workable equilibrium--has been there, as
it ever must be in every age and place, a matter of infinite experiment
and frequent mistakes.

In rough approximation we may point out four varying decades of work in
Southern education since the Civil War.  From the close of the war
until 1876, was the period of uncertain groping and temporary relief.
There were army schools, mission schools, and schools of the Freedmen's
Bureau in chaotic disarrangement seeking system and co-operation.  Then
followed ten years of constructive definite effort toward the building
of complete school systems in the South.  Normal schools and colleges
were founded for the freedmen, and teachers trained there to man the
public schools.  There was the inevitable tendency of war to
underestimate the prejudices of the master and the ignorance of the
slave, and all seemed clear sailing out of the wreckage of the storm.
Meantime, starting in this decade yet especially developing from 1885
to 1895, began the industrial revolution of the South.  The land saw
glimpses of a new destiny and the stirring of new ideals.  The
educational system striving to complete itself saw new obstacles and a
field of work ever broader and deeper.  The Negro colleges, hurriedly
founded, were inadequately equipped, illogically distributed, and of
varying efficiency and grade; the normal and high schools were doing
little more than common-school work, and the common schools were
training but a third of the children who ought to be in them, and
training these too often poorly.  At the same time the white South, by
reason of its sudden conversion from the slavery ideal, by so much the
more became set and strengthened in its racial prejudice, and
crystallized it into harsh law and harsher custom; while the marvellous
pushing forward of the poor white daily threatened to take even bread
and butter from the mouths of the heavily handicapped sons of the
freedmen.  In the midst, then, of the larger problem of Negro education
sprang up the more practical question of work, the inevitable economic
quandary that faces a people in the transition from slavery to freedom,
and especially those who make that change amid hate and prejudice,
lawlessness and ruthless competition.

The industrial school springing to notice in this decade, but coming to
full recognition in the decade beginning with 1895, was the proffered
answer to this combined educational and economic crisis, and an answer
of singular wisdom and timeliness.  From the very first in nearly all
the schools some attention had been given to training in handiwork, but
now was this training first raised to a dignity that brought it in
direct touch with the South's magnificent industrial development, and
given an emphasis which reminded black folk that before the Temple of
Knowledge swing the Gates of Toil.

Yet after all they are but gates, and when turning our eyes from the
temporary and the contingent in the Negro problem to the broader
question of the permanent uplifting and civilization of black men in
America, we have a right to inquire, as this enthusiasm for material
advancement mounts to its height, if after all the industrial school is
the final and sufficient answer in the training of the Negro race; and
to ask gently, but in all sincerity, the ever-recurring query of the
ages, Is not life more than meat, and the body more than raiment?  And
men ask this to-day all the more eagerly because of sinister signs in
recent educational movements.  The tendency is here, born of slavery
and quickened to renewed life by the crazy imperialism of the day, to
regard human beings as among the material resources of a land to be
trained with an eye single to future dividends.  Race-prejudices, which
keep brown and black men in their "places," we are coming to regard as
useful allies with such a theory, no matter how much they may dull the
ambition and sicken the hearts of struggling human beings.  And above
all, we daily hear that an education that encourages aspiration, that
sets the loftiest of ideals and seeks as an end culture and character
rather than bread-winning, is the privilege of white men and the danger
and delusion of black.

Especially has criticism been directed against the former educational
efforts to aid the Negro.  In the four periods I have mentioned, we
find first, boundless, planless enthusiasm and sacrifice; then the
preparation of teachers for a vast public-school system; then the
launching and expansion of that school system amid increasing
difficulties; and finally the training of workmen for the new and
growing industries.  This development has been sharply ridiculed as a
logical anomaly and flat reversal of nature.  Soothly we have been told
that first industrial and manual training should have taught the Negro
to work, then simple schools should have taught him to read and write,
and finally, after years, high and normal schools could have completed
the system, as intelligence and wealth demanded.

That a system logically so complete was historically impossible, it
needs but a little thought to prove.  Progress in human affairs is more
often a pull than a push, a surging forward of the exceptional man, and
the lifting of his duller brethren slowly and painfully to his
vantage-ground.  Thus it was no accident that gave birth to
universities centuries before the common schools, that made fair
Harvard the first flower of our wilderness.  So in the South: the mass
of the freedmen at the end of the war lacked the intelligence so
necessary to modern workingmen.  They must first have the common school
to teach them to read, write, and cipher; and they must have higher
schools to teach teachers for the common schools.  The white teachers
who flocked South went to establish such a common-school system.  Few
held the idea of founding colleges; most of them at first would have
laughed at the idea.  But they faced, as all men since them have faced,
that central paradox of the South,--the social separation of the races.
At that time it was the sudden volcanic rupture of nearly all relations
between black and white, in work and government and family life.  Since
then a new adjustment of relations in economic and political affairs
has grown up,--an adjustment subtle and difficult to grasp, yet
singularly ingenious, which leaves still that frightful chasm at the
color-line across which men pass at their peril.  Thus, then and now,
there stand in the South two separate worlds; and separate not simply
in the higher realms of social intercourse, but also in church and
school, on railway and street-car, in hotels and theatres, in streets
and city sections, in books and newspapers, in asylums and jails, in
hospitals and graveyards.  There is still enough of contact for large
economic and group cooperation, but the separation is so thorough and
deep that it absolutely precludes for the present between the races
anything like that sympathetic and effective group-training and
leadership of the one by the other, such as the American Negro and all
backward peoples must have for effectual progress.

This the missionaries of '68 soon saw; and if effective industrial and
trade schools were impracticable before the establishment of a
common-school system, just as certainly no adequate common schools
could be founded until there were teachers to teach them.  Southern
whites would not teach them; Northern whites in sufficient numbers
could not be had.  If the Negro was to learn, he must teach himself,
and the most effective help that could be given him was the
establishment of schools to train Negro teachers.  This conclusion was
slowly but surely reached by every student of the situation until
simultaneously, in widely separated regions, without consultation or
systematic plan, there arose a series of institutions designed to
furnish teachers for the untaught.  Above the sneers of critics at the
obvious defects of this procedure must ever stand its one crushing
rejoinder: in a single generation they put thirty thousand black
teachers in the South; they wiped out the illiteracy of the majority of
the black people of the land, and they made Tuskegee possible.

Such higher training-schools tended naturally to deepen broader
development: at first they were common and grammar schools, then some
became high schools.  And finally, by 1900, some thirty-four had one
year or more of studies of college grade.  This development was reached
with different degrees of speed in different institutions: Hampton is
still a high school, while Fisk University started her college in 1871,
and Spelman Seminary about 1896.  In all cases the aim was
identical,--to maintain the standards of the lower training by giving
teachers and leaders the best practicable training; and above all, to
furnish the black world with adequate standards of human culture and
lofty ideals of life.  It was not enough that the teachers of teachers
should be trained in technical normal methods; they must also, so far
as possible, be broad-minded, cultured men and women, to scatter
civilization among a people whose ignorance was not simply of letters,
but of life itself.

It can thus be seen that the work of education in the South began with
higher institutions of training, which threw off as their foliage
common schools, and later industrial schools, and at the same time
strove to shoot their roots ever deeper toward college and university
training.  That this was an inevitable and necessary development,
sooner or later, goes without saying; but there has been, and still is,
a question in many minds if the natural growth was not forced, and if
the higher training was not either overdone or done with cheap and
unsound methods.  Among white Southerners this feeling is widespread
and positive.  A prominent Southern journal voiced this in a recent
editorial.

"The experiment that has been made to give the colored students
classical training has not been satisfactory.  Even though many were
able to pursue the course, most of them did so in a parrot-like way,
learning what was taught, but not seeming to appropriate the truth and
import of their instruction, and graduating without sensible aim or
valuable occupation for their future.  The whole scheme has proved a
waste of time, efforts, and the money of the state."

While most fair-minded men would recognize this as extreme and
overdrawn, still without doubt many are asking, Are there a sufficient
number of Negroes ready for college training to warrant the
undertaking?  Are not too many students prematurely forced into this
work?  Does it not have the effect of dissatisfying the young Negro
with his environment?  And do these graduates succeed in real life?
Such natural questions cannot be evaded, nor on the other hand must a
Nation naturally skeptical as to Negro ability assume an unfavorable
answer without careful inquiry and patient openness to conviction.  We
must not forget that most Americans answer all queries regarding the
Negro a priori, and that the least that human courtesy can do is to
listen to evidence.

The advocates of the higher education of the Negro would be the last to
deny the incompleteness and glaring defects of the present system: too
many institutions have attempted to do college work, the work in some
cases has not been thoroughly done, and quantity rather than quality
has sometimes been sought.  But all this can be said of higher
education throughout the land; it is the almost inevitable incident of
educational growth, and leaves the deeper question of the legitimate
demand for the higher training of Negroes untouched.  And this latter
question can be settled in but one way,--by a first-hand study of the
facts.  If we leave out of view all institutions which have not
actually graduated students from a course higher than that of a New
England high school, even though they be called colleges; if then we
take the thirty-four remaining institutions, we may clear up many
misapprehensions by asking searchingly, What kind of institutions are
they? what do they teach? and what sort of men do they graduate?

And first we may say that this type of college, including Atlanta,
Fisk, and Howard, Wilberforce and Claflin, Shaw, and the rest, is
peculiar, almost unique.  Through the shining trees that whisper before
me as I write, I catch glimpses of a boulder of New England granite,
covering a grave, which graduates of Atlanta University have placed
there,--


   "GRATEFUL MEMORY OF THEIR FORMER TEACHER
   AND FRIEND AND OF THE UNSELFISH LIFE HE LIVED,
   AND THE NOBLE WORK HE WROUGHT; THAT THEY,
   THEIR CHILDREN, AND THEIR CHILDREN'S CHILDREN
              MIGHT BE BLESSED."


This was the gift of New England to the freed Negro: not alms, but a
friend; not cash, but character.  It was not and is not money these
seething millions want, but love and sympathy, the pulse of hearts
beating with red blood;--a gift which to-day only their own kindred and
race can bring to the masses, but which once saintly souls brought to
their favored children in the crusade of the sixties, that finest thing
in American history, and one of the few things untainted by sordid
greed and cheap vainglory.  The teachers in these institutions came not
to keep the Negroes in their place, but to raise them out of the
defilement of the places where slavery had wallowed them.  The colleges
they founded were social settlements; homes where the best of the sons
of the freedmen came in close and sympathetic touch with the best
traditions of New England.  They lived and ate together, studied and
worked, hoped and harkened in the dawning light.  In actual formal
content their curriculum was doubtless old-fashioned, but in
educational power it was supreme, for it was the contact of living
souls.

From such schools about two thousand Negroes have gone forth with the
bachelor's degree.  The number in itself is enough to put at rest the
argument that too large a proportion of Negroes are receiving higher
training.  If the ratio to population of all Negro students throughout
the land, in both college and secondary training, be counted,
Commissioner Harris assures us "it must be increased to five times its
present average" to equal the average of the land.

Fifty years ago the ability of Negro students in any appreciable
numbers to master a modern college course would have been difficult to
prove.  To-day it is proved by the fact that four hundred Negroes, many
of whom have been reported as brilliant students, have received the
bachelor's degree from Harvard, Yale, Oberlin, and seventy other
leading colleges.  Here we have, then, nearly twenty-five hundred Negro
graduates, of whom the crucial query must be made, How far did their
training fit them for life?  It is of course extremely difficult to
collect satisfactory data on such a point,--difficult to reach the men,
to get trustworthy testimony, and to gauge that testimony by any
generally acceptable criterion of success.  In 1900, the Conference at
Atlanta University undertook to study these graduates, and published
the results.  First they sought to know what these graduates were
doing, and succeeded in getting answers from nearly two-thirds of the
living.  The direct testimony was in almost all cases corroborated by
the reports of the colleges where they graduated, so that in the main
the reports were worthy of credence.  Fifty-three per cent of these
graduates were teachers,--presidents of institutions, heads of normal
schools, principals of city school-systems, and the like.  Seventeen
per cent were clergymen; another seventeen per cent were in the
professions, chiefly as physicians.  Over six per cent were merchants,
farmers, and artisans, and four per cent were in the government
civil-service.  Granting even that a considerable proportion of the
third unheard from are unsuccessful, this is a record of usefulness.
Personally I know many hundreds of these graduates, and have
corresponded with more than a thousand; through others I have followed
carefully the life-work of scores; I have taught some of them and some
of the pupils whom they have taught, lived in homes which they have
builded, and looked at life through their eyes.  Comparing them as a
class with my fellow students in New England and in Europe, I cannot
hesitate in saying that nowhere have I met men and women with a broader
spirit of helpfulness, with deeper devotion to their life-work, or with
more consecrated determination to succeed in the face of bitter
difficulties than among Negro college-bred men.  They have, to be sure,
their proportion of ne'er-do-wells, their pedants and lettered fools,
but they have a surprisingly small proportion of them; they have not
that culture of manner which we instinctively associate with university
men, forgetting that in reality it is the heritage from cultured homes,
and that no people a generation removed from slavery can escape a
certain unpleasant rawness and gaucherie, despite the best of training.

With all their larger vision and deeper sensibility, these men have
usually been conservative, careful leaders.  They have seldom been
agitators, have withstood the temptation to head the mob, and have
worked steadily and faithfully in a thousand communities in the South.
As teachers, they have given the South a commendable system of city
schools and large numbers of private normal-schools and academies.
Colored college-bred men have worked side by side with white college
graduates at Hampton; almost from the beginning the backbone of
Tuskegee's teaching force has been formed of graduates from Fisk and
Atlanta.  And to-day the institute is filled with college graduates,
from the energetic wife of the principal down to the teacher of
agriculture, including nearly half of the executive council and a
majority of the heads of departments.  In the professions, college men
are slowly but surely leavening the Negro church, are healing and
preventing the devastations of disease, and beginning to furnish legal
protection for the liberty and property of the toiling masses.  All
this is needful work.  Who would do it if Negroes did not?  How could
Negroes do it if they were not trained carefully for it?  If white
people need colleges to furnish teachers, ministers, lawyers, and
doctors, do black people need nothing of the sort?

If it is true that there are an appreciable number of Negro youth in
the land capable by character and talent to receive that higher
training, the end of which is culture, and if the two and a half
thousand who have had something of this training in the past have in
the main proved themselves useful to their race and generation, the
question then comes, What place in the future development of the South
ought the Negro college and college-bred man to occupy?  That the
present social separation and acute race-sensitiveness must eventually
yield to the influences of culture, as the South grows civilized, is
clear.  But such transformation calls for singular wisdom and patience.
If, while the healing of this vast sore is progressing, the races are
to live for many years side by side, united in economic effort, obeying
a common government, sensitive to mutual thought and feeling, yet
subtly and silently separate in many matters of deeper human
intimacy,--if this unusual and dangerous development is to progress
amid peace and order, mutual respect and growing intelligence, it will
call for social surgery at once the delicatest and nicest in modern
history.  It will demand broad-minded, upright men, both white and
black, and in its final accomplishment American civilization will
triumph.  So far as white men are concerned, this fact is to-day being
recognized in the South, and a happy renaissance of university
education seems imminent.  But the very voices that cry hail to this
good work are, strange to relate, largely silent or antagonistic to the
higher education of the Negro.

Strange to relate! for this is certain, no secure civilization can be
built in the South with the Negro as an ignorant, turbulent
proletariat.  Suppose we seek to remedy this by making them laborers
and nothing more: they are not fools, they have tasted of the Tree of
Life, and they will not cease to think, will not cease attempting to
read the riddle of the world.  By taking away their best equipped
teachers and leaders, by slamming the door of opportunity in the faces
of their bolder and brighter minds, will you make them satisfied with
their lot? or will you not rather transfer their leading from the hands
of men taught to think to the hands of untrained demagogues?  We ought
not to forget that despite the pressure of poverty, and despite the
active discouragement and even ridicule of friends, the demand for
higher training steadily increases among Negro youth: there were, in
the years from 1875 to 1880, 22 Negro graduates from Northern colleges;
from 1885 to 1890 there were 43, and from 1895 to 1900, nearly 100
graduates.  From Southern Negro colleges there were, in the same three
periods, 143, 413, and over 500 graduates.  Here, then, is the plain
thirst for training; by refusing to give this Talented Tenth the key to
knowledge, can any sane man imagine that they will lightly lay aside
their yearning and contentedly become hewers of wood and drawers of
water?

No. The dangerously clear logic of the Negro's position will more and
more loudly assert itself in that day when increasing wealth and more
intricate social organization preclude the South from being, as it so
largely is, simply an armed camp for intimidating black folk.  Such
waste of energy cannot be spared if the South is to catch up with
civilization.  And as the black third of the land grows in thrift and
skill, unless skilfully guided in its larger philosophy, it must more
and more brood over the red past and the creeping, crooked present,
until it grasps a gospel of revolt and revenge and throws its new-found
energies athwart the current of advance.  Even to-day the masses of the
Negroes see all too clearly the anomalies of their position and the
moral crookedness of yours.  You may marshal strong indictments against
them, but their counter-cries, lacking though they be in formal logic,
have burning truths within them which you may not wholly ignore, O
Southern Gentlemen!  If you deplore their presence here, they ask, Who
brought us?  When you cry, Deliver us from the vision of intermarriage,
they answer that legal marriage is infinitely better than systematic
concubinage and prostitution.  And if in just fury you accuse their
vagabonds of violating women, they also in fury quite as just may
reply: The rape which your gentlemen have done against helpless black
women in defiance of your own laws is written on the foreheads of two
millions of mulattoes, and written in ineffaceable blood.  And finally,
when you fasten crime upon this race as its peculiar trait, they answer
that slavery was the arch-crime, and lynching and lawlessness its twin
abortions; that color and race are not crimes, and yet it is they which
in this land receive most unceasing condemnation, North, East, South,
and West.

I will not say such arguments are wholly justified,--I will not insist
that there is no other side to the shield; but I do say that of the
nine millions of Negroes in this nation, there is scarcely one out of
the cradle to whom these arguments do not daily present themselves in
the guise of terrible truth.  I insist that the question of the future
is how best to keep these millions from brooding over the wrongs of the
past and the difficulties of the present, so that all their energies
may be bent toward a cheerful striving and cooperation with their white
neighbors toward a larger, juster, and fuller future.  That one wise
method of doing this lies in the closer knitting of the Negro to the
great industrial possibilities of the South is a great truth.  And this
the common schools and the manual training and trade schools are
working to accomplish.  But these alone are not enough.  The
foundations of knowledge in this race, as in others, must be sunk deep
in the college and university if we would build a solid, permanent
structure.  Internal problems of social advance must inevitably come,
--problems of work and wages, of families and homes, of morals and the
true valuing of the things of life; and all these and other inevitable
problems of civilization the Negro must meet and solve largely for
himself, by reason of his isolation; and can there be any possible
solution other than by study and thought and an appeal to the rich
experience of the past?  Is there not, with such a group and in such a
crisis, infinitely more danger to be apprehended from half-trained
minds and shallow thinking than from over-education and
over-refinement?  Surely we have wit enough to found a Negro college so
manned and equipped as to steer successfully between the dilettante and
the fool.  We shall hardly induce black men to believe that if their
stomachs be full, it matters little about their brains.  They already
dimly perceive that the paths of peace winding between honest toil and
dignified manhood call for the guidance of skilled thinkers, the
loving, reverent comradeship between the black lowly and the black men
emancipated by training and culture.

The function of the Negro college, then, is clear: it must maintain the
standards of popular education, it must seek the social regeneration of
the Negro, and it must help in the solution of problems of race contact
and cooperation.  And finally, beyond all this, it must develop men.
Above our modern socialism, and out of the worship of the mass, must
persist and evolve that higher individualism which the centres of
culture protect; there must come a loftier respect for the sovereign
human soul that seeks to know itself and the world about it; that seeks
a freedom for expansion and self-development; that will love and hate
and labor in its own way, untrammeled alike by old and new.  Such souls
aforetime have inspired and guided worlds, and if we be not wholly
bewitched by our Rhinegold, they shall again.  Herein the longing of
black men must have respect: the rich and bitter depth of their
experience, the unknown treasures of their inner life, the strange
rendings of nature they have seen, may give the world new points of
view and make their loving, living, and doing precious to all human
hearts.  And to themselves in these the days that try their souls, the
chance to soar in the dim blue air above the smoke is to their finer
spirits boon and guerdon for what they lose on earth by being black.

I sit with Shakespeare and he winces not.  Across the color line I move
arm in arm with Balzac and Dumas, where smiling men and welcoming women
glide in gilded halls.  From out the caves of evening that swing
between the strong-limbed earth and the tracery of the stars, I summon
Aristotle and Aurelius and what soul I will, and they come all
graciously with no scorn nor condescension.  So, wed with Truth, I
dwell above the Veil.  Is this the life you grudge us, O knightly
America?  Is this the life you long to change into the dull red
hideousness of Georgia?  Are you so afraid lest peering from this high
Pisgah, between Philistine and Amalekite, we sight the Promised Land?




VII

Of the Black Belt

  I am black but comely, O ye daughters of Jerusalem,
  As the tents of Kedar, as the curtains of Solomon.
  Look not upon me, because I am black,
  Because the sun hath looked upon me:
  My mother's children were angry with me;
  They made me the keeper of the vineyards;
  But mine own vineyard have I not kept.

  THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


Out of the North the train thundered, and we woke to see the crimson
soil of Georgia stretching away bare and monotonous right and left.
Here and there lay straggling, unlovely villages, and lean men loafed
leisurely at the depots; then again came the stretch of pines and clay.
Yet we did not nod, nor weary of the scene; for this is historic
ground.  Right across our track, three hundred and sixty years ago,
wandered the cavalcade of Hernando de Soto, looking for gold and the
Great Sea; and he and his foot-sore captives disappeared yonder in the
grim forests to the west.  Here sits Atlanta, the city of a hundred
hills, with something Western, something Southern, and something quite
its own, in its busy life.  Just this side Atlanta is the land of the
Cherokees and to the southwest, not far from where Sam Hose was
crucified, you may stand on a spot which is to-day the centre of the
Negro problem,--the centre of those nine million men who are America's
dark heritage from slavery and the slave-trade.

Not only is Georgia thus the geographical focus of our Negro
population, but in many other respects, both now and yesterday, the
Negro problems have seemed to be centered in this State.  No other
State in the Union can count a million Negroes among its citizens,--a
population as large as the slave population of the whole Union in 1800;
no other State fought so long and strenuously to gather this host of
Africans.  Oglethorpe thought slavery against law and gospel; but the
circumstances which gave Georgia its first inhabitants were not
calculated to furnish citizens over-nice in their ideas about rum and
slaves.  Despite the prohibitions of the trustees, these Georgians,
like some of their descendants, proceeded to take the law into their
own hands; and so pliant were the judges, and so flagrant the
smuggling, and so earnest were the prayers of Whitefield, that by the
middle of the eighteenth century all restrictions were swept away, and
the slave-trade went merrily on for fifty years and more.

Down in Darien, where the Delegal riots took place some summers ago,
there used to come a strong protest against slavery from the Scotch
Highlanders; and the Moravians of Ebenezer did not like the system.
But not till the Haytian Terror of Toussaint was the trade in men even
checked; while the national statute of 1808 did not suffice to stop it.
How the Africans poured in!--fifty thousand between 1790 and 1810, and
then, from Virginia and from smugglers, two thousand a year for many
years more.  So the thirty thousand Negroes of Georgia in 1790 doubled
in a decade,--were over a hundred thousand in 1810, had reached two
hundred thousand in 1820, and half a million at the time of the war.
Thus like a snake the black population writhed upward.

But we must hasten on our journey.  This that we pass as we near
Atlanta is the ancient land of the Cherokees,--that brave Indian nation
which strove so long for its fatherland, until Fate and the United
States Government drove them beyond the Mississippi.  If you wish to
ride with me you must come into the "Jim Crow Car."  There will be no
objection,--already four other white men, and a little white girl with
her nurse, are in there.  Usually the races are mixed in there; but the
white coach is all white.  Of course this car is not so good as the
other, but it is fairly clean and comfortable.  The discomfort lies
chiefly in the hearts of those four black men yonder--and in mine.

We rumble south in quite a business-like way.  The bare red clay and
pines of Northern Georgia begin to disappear, and in their place
appears a rich rolling land, luxuriant, and here and there well tilled.
This is the land of the Creek Indians; and a hard time the Georgians
had to seize it.  The towns grow more frequent and more interesting,
and brand-new cotton mills rise on every side.  Below Macon the world
grows darker; for now we approach the Black Belt,--that strange land of
shadows, at which even slaves paled in the past, and whence come now
only faint and half-intelligible murmurs to the world beyond.  The "Jim
Crow Car" grows larger and a shade better; three rough field-hands and
two or three white loafers accompany us, and the newsboy still spreads
his wares at one end.  The sun is setting, but we can see the great
cotton country as we enter it,--the soil now dark and fertile, now thin
and gray, with fruit-trees and dilapidated buildings,--all the way to
Albany.

At Albany, in the heart of the Black Belt, we stop.  Two hundred miles
south of Atlanta, two hundred miles west of the Atlantic, and one
hundred miles north of the Great Gulf lies Dougherty County, with ten
thousand Negroes and two thousand whites.  The Flint River winds down
from Andersonville, and, turning suddenly at Albany, the county-seat,
hurries on to join the Chattahoochee and the sea.  Andrew Jackson knew
the Flint well, and marched across it once to avenge the Indian
Massacre at Fort Mims.  That was in 1814, not long before the battle of
New Orleans; and by the Creek treaty that followed this campaign, all
Dougherty County, and much other rich land, was ceded to Georgia.
Still, settlers fought shy of this land, for the Indians were all
about, and they were unpleasant neighbors in those days.  The panic of
1837, which Jackson bequeathed to Van Buren, turned the planters from
the impoverished lands of Virginia, the Carolinas, and east Georgia,
toward the West.  The Indians were removed to Indian Territory, and
settlers poured into these coveted lands to retrieve their broken
fortunes.  For a radius of a hundred miles about Albany, stretched a
great fertile land, luxuriant with forests of pine, oak, ash, hickory,
and poplar; hot with the sun and damp with the rich black swamp-land;
and here the corner-stone of the Cotton Kingdom was laid.

Albany is to-day a wide-streeted, placid, Southern town, with a broad
sweep of stores and saloons, and flanking rows of homes,--whites
usually to the north, and blacks to the south.  Six days in the week
the town looks decidedly too small for itself, and takes frequent and
prolonged naps.  But on Saturday suddenly the whole county disgorges
itself upon the place, and a perfect flood of black peasantry pours
through the streets, fills the stores, blocks the sidewalks, chokes the
thoroughfares, and takes full possession of the town.  They are black,
sturdy, uncouth country folk, good-natured and simple, talkative to a
degree, and yet far more silent and brooding than the crowds of the
Rhine-pfalz, or Naples, or Cracow.  They drink considerable quantities
of whiskey, but do not get very drunk; they talk and laugh loudly at
times, but seldom quarrel or fight.  They walk up and down the streets,
meet and gossip with friends, stare at the shop windows, buy coffee,
cheap candy, and clothes, and at dusk drive home--happy? well no, not
exactly happy, but much happier than as though they had not come.

Thus Albany is a real capital,--a typical Southern county town, the
centre of the life of ten thousand souls; their point of contact with
the outer world, their centre of news and gossip, their market for
buying and selling, borrowing and lending, their fountain of justice
and law.  Once upon a time we knew country life so well and city life
so little, that we illustrated city life as that of a closely crowded
country district.  Now the world has well-nigh forgotten what the
country is, and we must imagine a little city of black people scattered
far and wide over three hundred lonesome square miles of land, without
train or trolley, in the midst of cotton and corn, and wide patches of
sand and gloomy soil.

It gets pretty hot in Southern Georgia in July,--a sort of dull,
determined heat that seems quite independent of the sun; so it took us
some days to muster courage enough to leave the porch and venture out
on the long country roads, that we might see this unknown world.
Finally we started.  It was about ten in the morning, bright with a
faint breeze, and we jogged leisurely southward in the valley of the
Flint.  We passed the scattered box-like cabins of the brickyard hands,
and the long tenement-row facetiously called "The Ark," and were soon
in the open country, and on the confines of the great plantations of
other days.  There is the "Joe Fields place"; a rough old fellow was
he, and had killed many a "nigger" in his day.  Twelve miles his
plantation used to run,--a regular barony.  It is nearly all gone now;
only straggling bits belong to the family, and the rest has passed to
Jews and Negroes.  Even the bits which are left are heavily mortgaged,
and, like the rest of the land, tilled by tenants.  Here is one of them
now,--a tall brown man, a hard worker and a hard drinker, illiterate,
but versed in farmlore, as his nodding crops declare.  This
distressingly new board house is his, and he has just moved out of
yonder moss-grown cabin with its one square room.

From the curtains in Benton's house, down the road, a dark comely face
is staring at the strangers; for passing carriages are not every-day
occurrences here.  Benton is an intelligent yellow man with a
good-sized family, and manages a plantation blasted by the war and now
the broken staff of the widow.  He might be well-to-do, they say; but
he carouses too much in Albany.  And the half-desolate spirit of
neglect born of the very soil seems to have settled on these acres.  In
times past there were cotton-gins and machinery here; but they have
rotted away.

The whole land seems forlorn and forsaken.  Here are the remnants of
the vast plantations of the Sheldons, the Pellots, and the Rensons; but
the souls of them are passed.  The houses lie in half ruin, or have
wholly disappeared; the fences have flown, and the families are
wandering in the world.  Strange vicissitudes have met these whilom
masters.  Yonder stretch the wide acres of Bildad Reasor; he died in
war-time, but the upstart overseer hastened to wed the widow.  Then he
went, and his neighbors too, and now only the black tenant remains; but
the shadow-hand of the master's grand-nephew or cousin or creditor
stretches out of the gray distance to collect the rack-rent
remorselessly, and so the land is uncared-for and poor.  Only black
tenants can stand such a system, and they only because they must.  Ten
miles we have ridden to-day and have seen no white face.

A resistless feeling of depression falls slowly upon us, despite the
gaudy sunshine and the green cottonfields.  This, then, is the Cotton
Kingdom,--the shadow of a marvellous dream.  And where is the King?
Perhaps this is he,--the sweating ploughman, tilling his eighty acres
with two lean mules, and fighting a hard battle with debt.  So we sit
musing, until, as we turn a corner on the sandy road, there comes a
fairer scene suddenly in view,--a neat cottage snugly ensconced by the
road, and near it a little store.  A tall bronzed man rises from the
porch as we hail him, and comes out to our carriage.  He is six feet in
height, with a sober face that smiles gravely.  He walks too straight
to be a tenant,--yes, he owns two hundred and forty acres.  "The land
is run down since the boom-days of eighteen hundred and fifty," he
explains, and cotton is low.  Three black tenants live on his place,
and in his little store he keeps a small stock of tobacco, snuff, soap,
and soda, for the neighborhood.  Here is his gin-house with new
machinery just installed.  Three hundred bales of cotton went through
it last year.  Two children he has sent away to school.  Yes, he says
sadly, he is getting on, but cotton is down to four cents; I know how
Debt sits staring at him.

Wherever the King may be, the parks and palaces of the Cotton Kingdom
have not wholly disappeared.  We plunge even now into great groves of
oak and towering pine, with an undergrowth of myrtle and shrubbery.
This was the "home-house" of the Thompsons,--slave-barons who drove
their coach and four in the merry past.  All is silence now, and ashes,
and tangled weeds.  The owner put his whole fortune into the rising
cotton industry of the fifties, and with the falling prices of the
eighties he packed up and stole away.  Yonder is another grove, with
unkempt lawn, great magnolias, and grass-grown paths.  The Big House
stands in half-ruin, its great front door staring blankly at the
street, and the back part grotesquely restored for its black tenant.  A
shabby, well-built Negro he is, unlucky and irresolute.  He digs hard
to pay rent to the white girl who owns the remnant of the place.  She
married a policeman, and lives in Savannah.

Now and again we come to churches.  Here is one now,--Shepherd's, they
call it,--a great whitewashed barn of a thing, perched on stilts of
stone, and looking for all the world as though it were just resting
here a moment and might be expected to waddle off down the road at
almost any time.  And yet it is the centre of a hundred cabin homes;
and sometimes, of a Sunday, five hundred persons from far and near
gather here and talk and eat and sing.  There is a schoolhouse near,--a
very airy, empty shed; but even this is an improvement, for usually the
school is held in the church.  The churches vary from log-huts to those
like Shepherd's, and the schools from nothing to this little house that
sits demurely on the county line.  It is a tiny plank-house, perhaps
ten by twenty, and has within a double row of rough unplaned benches,
resting mostly on legs, sometimes on boxes.  Opposite the door is a
square home-made desk.  In one corner are the ruins of a stove, and in
the other a dim blackboard.  It is the cheerfulest schoolhouse I have
seen in Dougherty, save in town.  Back of the schoolhouse is a
lodgehouse two stories high and not quite finished.  Societies meet
there,--societies "to care for the sick and bury the dead"; and these
societies grow and flourish.

We had come to the boundaries of Dougherty, and were about to turn west
along the county-line, when all these sights were pointed out to us by
a kindly old man, black, white-haired, and seventy.  Forty-five years
he had lived here, and now supports himself and his old wife by the
help of the steer tethered yonder and the charity of his black
neighbors.  He shows us the farm of the Hills just across the county
line in Baker,--a widow and two strapping sons, who raised ten bales
(one need not add "cotton" down here) last year.  There are fences and
pigs and cows, and the soft-voiced, velvet-skinned young Memnon, who
sauntered half-bashfully over to greet the strangers, is proud of his
home.  We turn now to the west along the county line.  Great dismantled
trunks of pines tower above the green cottonfields, cracking their
naked gnarled fingers toward the border of living forest beyond.  There
is little beauty in this region, only a sort of crude abandon that
suggests power,--a naked grandeur, as it were.  The houses are bare and
straight; there are no hammocks or easy-chairs, and few flowers.  So
when, as here at Rawdon's, one sees a vine clinging to a little porch,
and home-like windows peeping over the fences, one takes a long breath.
I think I never before quite realized the place of the Fence in
civilization.  This is the Land of the Unfenced, where crouch on either
hand scores of ugly one-room cabins, cheerless and dirty.  Here lies
the Negro problem in its naked dirt and penury.  And here are no
fences.  But now and then the crisscross rails or straight palings
break into view, and then we know a touch of culture is near.  Of
course Harrison Gohagen,--a quiet yellow man, young, smooth-faced, and
diligent,--of course he is lord of some hundred acres, and we expect to
see a vision of well-kept rooms and fat beds and laughing children.
For has he not fine fences?  And those over yonder, why should they
build fences on the rack-rented land?  It will only increase their rent.

On we wind, through sand and pines and glimpses of old plantations,
till there creeps into sight a cluster of buildings,--wood and brick,
mills and houses, and scattered cabins.  It seemed quite a village.  As
it came nearer and nearer, however, the aspect changed: the buildings
were rotten, the bricks were falling out, the mills were silent, and
the store was closed.  Only in the cabins appeared now and then a bit
of lazy life.  I could imagine the place under some weird spell, and
was half-minded to search out the princess.  An old ragged black man,
honest, simple, and improvident, told us the tale.  The Wizard of the
North--the Capitalist--had rushed down in the seventies to woo this coy
dark soil.  He bought a square mile or more, and for a time the
field-hands sang, the gins groaned, and the mills buzzed.  Then came a
change.  The agent's son embezzled the funds and ran off with them.
Then the agent himself disappeared.  Finally the new agent stole even
the books, and the company in wrath closed its business and its houses,
refused to sell, and let houses and furniture and machinery rust and
rot.  So the Waters-Loring plantation was stilled by the spell of
dishonesty, and stands like some gaunt rebuke to a scarred land.

Somehow that plantation ended our day's journey; for I could not shake
off the influence of that silent scene.  Back toward town we glided,
past the straight and thread-like pines, past a dark tree-dotted pond
where the air was heavy with a dead sweet perfume.  White
slender-legged curlews flitted by us, and the garnet blooms of the
cotton looked gay against the green and purple stalks.  A peasant girl
was hoeing in the field, white-turbaned and black-limbed.  All this we
saw, but the spell still lay upon us.

How curious a land is this,--how full of untold story, of tragedy and
laughter, and the rich legacy of human life; shadowed with a tragic
past, and big with future promise!  This is the Black Belt of Georgia.
Dougherty County is the west end of the Black Belt, and men once called
it the Egypt of the Confederacy.  It is full of historic interest.
First there is the Swamp, to the west, where the Chickasawhatchee flows
sullenly southward.  The shadow of an old plantation lies at its edge,
forlorn and dark.  Then comes the pool; pendent gray moss and brackish
waters appear, and forests filled with wildfowl.  In one place the wood
is on fire, smouldering in dull red anger; but nobody minds.  Then the
swamp grows beautiful; a raised road, built by chained Negro convicts,
dips down into it, and forms a way walled and almost covered in living
green.  Spreading trees spring from a prodigal luxuriance of
undergrowth; great dark green shadows fade into the black background,
until all is one mass of tangled semi-tropical foliage, marvellous in
its weird savage splendor.  Once we crossed a black silent stream,
where the sad trees and writhing creepers, all glinting fiery yellow
and green, seemed like some vast cathedral,--some green Milan builded
of wildwood.  And as I crossed, I seemed to see again that fierce
tragedy of seventy years ago.  Osceola, the Indian-Negro chieftain, had
risen in the swamps of Florida, vowing vengeance.  His war-cry reached
the red Creeks of Dougherty, and their war-cry rang from the
Chattahoochee to the sea.  Men and women and children fled and fell
before them as they swept into Dougherty.  In yonder shadows a dark and
hideously painted warrior glided stealthily on,--another and another,
until three hundred had crept into the treacherous swamp.  Then the
false slime closing about them called the white men from the east.
Waist-deep, they fought beneath the tall trees, until the war-cry was
hushed and the Indians glided back into the west.  Small wonder the
wood is red.

Then came the black slaves.  Day after day the clank of chained feet
marching from Virginia and Carolina to Georgia was heard in these rich
swamp lands.  Day after day the songs of the callous, the wail of the
motherless, and the muttered curses of the wretched echoed from the
Flint to the Chickasawhatchee, until by 1860 there had risen in West
Dougherty perhaps the richest slave kingdom the modern world ever knew.
A hundred and fifty barons commanded the labor of nearly six thousand
Negroes, held sway over farms with ninety thousand acres tilled land,
valued even in times of cheap soil at three millions of dollars.
Twenty thousand bales of ginned cotton went yearly to England, New and
Old; and men that came there bankrupt made money and grew rich.  In a
single decade the cotton output increased four-fold and the value of
lands was tripled.  It was the heyday of the nouveau riche, and a life
of careless extravagance among the masters.  Four and six bobtailed
thoroughbreds rolled their coaches to town; open hospitality and gay
entertainment were the rule.  Parks and groves were laid out, rich with
flower and vine, and in the midst stood the low wide-halled "big
house," with its porch and columns and great fireplaces.

And yet with all this there was something sordid, something forced,--a
certain feverish unrest and recklessness; for was not all this show and
tinsel built upon a groan?  "This land was a little Hell," said a
ragged, brown, and grave-faced man to me.  We were seated near a
roadside blacksmith shop, and behind was the bare ruin of some master's
home.  "I've seen niggers drop dead in the furrow, but they were kicked
aside, and the plough never stopped.  Down in the guard-house, there's
where the blood ran."

With such foundations a kingdom must in time sway and fall.  The
masters moved to Macon and Augusta, and left only the irresponsible
overseers on the land.  And the result is such ruin as this, the Lloyd
"home-place":--great waving oaks, a spread of lawn, myrtles and
chestnuts, all ragged and wild; a solitary gate-post standing where
once was a castle entrance; an old rusty anvil lying amid rotting
bellows and wood in the ruins of a blacksmith shop; a wide rambling old
mansion, brown and dingy, filled now with the grandchildren of the
slaves who once waited on its tables; while the family of the master
has dwindled to two lone women, who live in Macon and feed hungrily off
the remnants of an earldom.  So we ride on, past phantom gates and
falling homes,--past the once flourishing farms of the Smiths, the
Gandys, and the Lagores,--and find all dilapidated and half ruined,
even there where a solitary white woman, a relic of other days, sits
alone in state among miles of Negroes and rides to town in her ancient
coach each day.

This was indeed the Egypt of the Confederacy,--the rich granary whence
potatoes and corn and cotton poured out to the famished and ragged
Confederate troops as they battled for a cause lost long before 1861.
Sheltered and secure, it became the place of refuge for families,
wealth, and slaves.  Yet even then the hard ruthless rape of the land
began to tell.  The red-clay sub-soil already had begun to peer above
the loam.  The harder the slaves were driven the more careless and
fatal was their farming.  Then came the revolution of war and
Emancipation, the bewilderment of Reconstruction,--and now, what is the
Egypt of the Confederacy, and what meaning has it for the nation's weal
or woe?

It is a land of rapid contrasts and of curiously mingled hope and pain.
Here sits a pretty blue-eyed quadroon hiding her bare feet; she was
married only last week, and yonder in the field is her dark young
husband, hoeing to support her, at thirty cents a day without board.
Across the way is Gatesby, brown and tall, lord of two thousand acres
shrewdly won and held.  There is a store conducted by his black son, a
blacksmith shop, and a ginnery.  Five miles below here is a town owned
and controlled by one white New Englander.  He owns almost a Rhode
Island county, with thousands of acres and hundreds of black laborers.
Their cabins look better than most, and the farm, with machinery and
fertilizers, is much more business-like than any in the county,
although the manager drives hard bargains in wages.  When now we turn
and look five miles above, there on the edge of town are five houses of
prostitutes,--two of blacks and three of whites; and in one of the
houses of the whites a worthless black boy was harbored too openly two
years ago; so he was hanged for rape.  And here, too, is the high
whitewashed fence of the "stockade," as the county prison is called;
the white folks say it is ever full of black criminals,--the black
folks say that only colored boys are sent to jail, and they not because
they are guilty, but because the State needs criminals to eke out its
income by their forced labor.

Immigrants are heirs of the slave baron in Dougherty; and as we ride
westward, by wide stretching cornfields and stubby orchards of peach
and pear, we see on all sides within the circle of dark forest a Land
of Canaan.  Here and there are tales of projects for money-getting,
born in the swift days of Reconstruction,--"improvement" companies,
wine companies, mills and factories; most failed, and foreigners fell
heir.  It is a beautiful land, this Dougherty, west of the Flint.  The
forests are wonderful, the solemn pines have disappeared, and this is
the "Oakey Woods," with its wealth of hickories, beeches, oaks and
palmettos.  But a pall of debt hangs over the beautiful land; the
merchants are in debt to the wholesalers, the planters are in debt to
the merchants, the tenants owe the planters, and laborers bow and bend
beneath the burden of it all.  Here and there a man has raised his head
above these murky waters.  We passed one fenced stock-farm with grass
and grazing cattle, that looked very home-like after endless corn and
cotton.  Here and there are black free-holders: there is the gaunt
dull-black Jackson, with his hundred acres.  "I says, 'Look up!  If you
don't look up you can't get up,'" remarks Jackson, philosophically.
And he's gotten up.  Dark Carter's neat barns would do credit to New
England.  His master helped him to get a start, but when the black man
died last fall the master's sons immediately laid claim to the estate.
"And them white folks will get it, too," said my yellow gossip.

I turn from these well-tended acres with a comfortable feeling that the
Negro is rising.  Even then, however, the fields, as we proceed, begin
to redden and the trees disappear.  Rows of old cabins appear filled
with renters and laborers,--cheerless, bare, and dirty, for the most
part, although here and there the very age and decay makes the scene
picturesque.  A young black fellow greets us.  He is twenty-two, and
just married.  Until last year he had good luck renting; then cotton
fell, and the sheriff seized and sold all he had.  So he moved here,
where the rent is higher, the land poorer, and the owner inflexible; he
rents a forty-dollar mule for twenty dollars a year.  Poor lad!--a
slave at twenty-two.  This plantation, owned now by a foreigner, was a
part of the famous Bolton estate.  After the war it was for many years
worked by gangs of Negro convicts,--and black convicts then were even
more plentiful than now; it was a way of making Negroes work, and the
question of guilt was a minor one.  Hard tales of cruelty and
mistreatment of the chained freemen are told, but the county
authorities were deaf until the free-labor market was nearly ruined by
wholesale migration.  Then they took the convicts from the plantations,
but not until one of the fairest regions of the "Oakey Woods" had been
ruined and ravished into a red waste, out of which only a Yankee or an
immigrant could squeeze more blood from debt-cursed tenants.

No wonder that Luke Black, slow, dull, and discouraged, shuffles to our
carriage and talks hopelessly.  Why should he strive?  Every year finds
him deeper in debt.  How strange that Georgia, the world-heralded
refuge of poor debtors, should bind her own to sloth and misfortune as
ruthlessly as ever England did!  The poor land groans with its
birth-pains, and brings forth scarcely a hundred pounds of cotton to
the acre, where fifty years ago it yielded eight times as much.  Of his
meagre yield the tenant pays from a quarter to a third in rent, and
most of the rest in interest on food and supplies bought on credit.
Twenty years yonder sunken-cheeked, old black man has labored under
that system, and now, turned day-laborer, is supporting his wife and
boarding himself on his wages of a dollar and a half a week, received
only part of the year.

The Bolton convict farm formerly included the neighboring plantation.
Here it was that the convicts were lodged in the great log prison still
standing.  A dismal place it still remains, with rows of ugly huts
filled with surly ignorant tenants.  "What rent do you pay here?" I
inquired.  "I don't know,--what is it, Sam?"  "All we make," answered
Sam.  It is a depressing place,--bare, unshaded, with no charm of past
association, only a memory of forced human toil,--now, then, and before
the war.  They are not happy, these black men whom we meet throughout
this region.  There is little of the joyous abandon and playfulness
which we are wont to associate with the plantation Negro.  At best, the
natural good-nature is edged with complaint or has changed into
sullenness and gloom.  And now and then it blazes forth in veiled but
hot anger.  I remember one big red-eyed black whom we met by the
roadside.  Forty-five years he had labored on this farm, beginning with
nothing, and still having nothing.  To be sure, he had given four
children a common-school training, and perhaps if the new fence-law had
not allowed unfenced crops in West Dougherty he might have raised a
little stock and kept ahead.  As it is, he is hopelessly in debt,
disappointed, and embittered.  He stopped us to inquire after the black
boy in Albany, whom it was said a policeman had shot and killed for
loud talking on the sidewalk.  And then he said slowly: "Let a white
man touch me, and he dies; I don't boast this,--I don't say it around
loud, or before the children,--but I mean it.  I've seen them whip my
father and my old mother in them cotton-rows till the blood ran; by--"
and we passed on.

Now Sears, whom we met next lolling under the chubby oak-trees, was of
quite different fibre.  Happy?--Well, yes; he laughed and flipped
pebbles, and thought the world was as it was.  He had worked here
twelve years and has nothing but a mortgaged mule.  Children?  Yes,
seven; but they hadn't been to school this year,--couldn't afford books
and clothes, and couldn't spare their work.  There go part of them to
the fields now,--three big boys astride mules, and a strapping girl
with bare brown legs.  Careless ignorance and laziness here, fierce
hate and vindictiveness there;--these are the extremes of the Negro
problem which we met that day, and we scarce knew which we preferred.

Here and there we meet distinct characters quite out of the ordinary.
One came out of a piece of newly cleared ground, making a wide detour
to avoid the snakes.  He was an old, hollow-cheeked man, with a drawn
and characterful brown face.  He had a sort of self-contained
quaintness and rough humor impossible to describe; a certain cynical
earnestness that puzzled one.  "The niggers were jealous of me over on
the other place," he said, "and so me and the old woman begged this
piece of woods, and I cleared it up myself.  Made nothing for two
years, but I reckon I've got a crop now."  The cotton looked tall and
rich, and we praised it.  He curtsied low, and then bowed almost to the
ground, with an imperturbable gravity that seemed almost suspicious.
Then he continued, "My mule died last week,"--a calamity in this land
equal to a devastating fire in town,--"but a white man loaned me
another."  Then he added, eyeing us, "Oh, I gets along with white
folks."  We turned the conversation.  "Bears? deer?" he answered,
"well, I should say there were," and he let fly a string of brave
oaths, as he told hunting-tales of the swamp.  We left him standing
still in the middle of the road looking after us, and yet apparently
not noticing us.

The Whistle place, which includes his bit of land, was bought soon
after the war by an English syndicate, the "Dixie Cotton and Corn
Company."  A marvellous deal of style their factor put on, with his
servants and coach-and-six; so much so that the concern soon landed in
inextricable bankruptcy.  Nobody lives in the old house now, but a man
comes each winter out of the North and collects his high rents.  I know
not which are the more touching,--such old empty houses, or the homes
of the masters' sons.  Sad and bitter tales lie hidden back of those
white doors,--tales of poverty, of struggle, of disappointment.  A
revolution such as that of '63 is a terrible thing; they that rose rich
in the morning often slept in paupers' beds.  Beggars and vulgar
speculators rose to rule over them, and their children went astray.
See yonder sad-colored house, with its cabins and fences and glad
crops!  It is not glad within; last month the prodigal son of the
struggling father wrote home from the city for money.  Money!  Where
was it to come from?  And so the son rose in the night and killed his
baby, and killed his wife, and shot himself dead.  And the world passed
on.

I remember wheeling around a bend in the road beside a graceful bit of
forest and a singing brook.  A long low house faced us, with porch and
flying pillars, great oaken door, and a broad lawn shining in the
evening sun.  But the window-panes were gone, the pillars were
worm-eaten, and the moss-grown roof was falling in.  Half curiously I
peered through the unhinged door, and saw where, on the wall across the
hall, was written in once gay letters a faded "Welcome."

Quite a contrast to the southwestern part of Dougherty County is the
northwest.  Soberly timbered in oak and pine, it has none of that
half-tropical luxuriance of the southwest.  Then, too, there are fewer
signs of a romantic past, and more of systematic modern land-grabbing
and money-getting.  White people are more in evidence here, and farmer
and hired labor replace to some extent the absentee landlord and
rack-rented tenant.  The crops have neither the luxuriance of the
richer land nor the signs of neglect so often seen, and there were
fences and meadows here and there.  Most of this land was poor, and
beneath the notice of the slave-baron, before the war.  Since then his
poor relations and foreign immigrants have seized it.  The returns of
the farmer are too small to allow much for wages, and yet he will not
sell off small farms.  There is the Negro Sanford; he has worked
fourteen years as overseer on the Ladson place, and "paid out enough
for fertilizers to have bought a farm," but the owner will not sell off
a few acres.

Two children--a boy and a girl--are hoeing sturdily in the fields on
the farm where Corliss works.  He is smooth-faced and brown, and is
fencing up his pigs.  He used to run a successful cotton-gin, but the
Cotton Seed Oil Trust has forced the price of ginning so low that he
says it hardly pays him.  He points out a stately old house over the
way as the home of "Pa Willis."  We eagerly ride over, for "Pa Willis"
was the tall and powerful black Moses who led the Negroes for a
generation, and led them well.  He was a Baptist preacher, and when he
died, two thousand black people followed him to the grave; and now they
preach his funeral sermon each year.  His widow lives here,--a
weazened, sharp-featured little woman, who curtsied quaintly as we
greeted her.  Further on lives Jack Delson, the most prosperous Negro
farmer in the county.  It is a joy to meet him,--a great
broad-shouldered, handsome black man, intelligent and jovial.  Six
hundred and fifty acres he owns, and has eleven black tenants.  A neat
and tidy home nestled in a flower-garden, and a little store stands
beside it.

We pass the Munson place, where a plucky white widow is renting and
struggling; and the eleven hundred acres of the Sennet plantation, with
its Negro overseer.  Then the character of the farms begins to change.
Nearly all the lands belong to Russian Jews; the overseers are white,
and the cabins are bare board-houses scattered here and there.  The
rents are high, and day-laborers and "contract" hands abound.  It is a
keen, hard struggle for living here, and few have time to talk.  Tired
with the long ride, we gladly drive into Gillonsville.  It is a silent
cluster of farmhouses standing on the crossroads, with one of its
stores closed and the other kept by a Negro preacher.  They tell great
tales of busy times at Gillonsville before all the railroads came to
Albany; now it is chiefly a memory.  Riding down the street, we stop at
the preacher's and seat ourselves before the door.  It was one of those
scenes one cannot soon forget:--a wide, low, little house, whose
motherly roof reached over and sheltered a snug little porch.  There we
sat, after the long hot drive, drinking cool water,--the talkative
little storekeeper who is my daily companion; the silent old black
woman patching pantaloons and saying never a word; the ragged picture
of helpless misfortune who called in just to see the preacher; and
finally the neat matronly preacher's wife, plump, yellow, and
intelligent.  "Own land?" said the wife; "well, only this house."  Then
she added quietly.  "We did buy seven hundred acres across up yonder,
and paid for it; but they cheated us out of it.  Sells was the owner."
"Sells!" echoed the ragged misfortune, who was leaning against the
balustrade and listening, "he's a regular cheat.  I worked for him
thirty-seven days this spring, and he paid me in cardboard checks which
were to be cashed at the end of the month.  But he never cashed
them,--kept putting me off.  Then the sheriff came and took my mule and
corn and furniture--" "Furniture?  But furniture is exempt from seizure
by law."  "Well, he took it just the same," said the hard-faced man.




VIII

Of the Quest of the Golden Fleece

  But the Brute said in his breast, "Till the mills I grind
          have ceased,
  The riches shall be dust of dust, dry ashes be the feast!

     "On the strong and cunning few
     Cynic favors I will strew;
  I will stuff their maw with overplus until their spirit dies;
  From the patient and the low

  I will take the joys they know;
      They shall hunger after vanities and still an-hungered go.
  Madness shall be on the people, ghastly jealousies arise;
  Brother's blood shall cry on brother up the dead and empty skies.

  WILLIAM VAUGHN MOODY.


Have you ever seen a cotton-field white with harvest,--its golden
fleece hovering above the black earth like a silvery cloud edged with
dark green, its bold white signals waving like the foam of billows from
Carolina to Texas across that Black and human Sea?  I have sometimes
half suspected that here the winged ram Chrysomallus left that Fleece
after which Jason and his Argonauts went vaguely wandering into the
shadowy East three thousand years ago; and certainly one might frame a
pretty and not far-fetched analogy of witchery and dragons' teeth, and
blood and armed men, between the ancient and the modern quest of the
Golden Fleece in the Black Sea.

And now the golden fleece is found; not only found, but, in its
birthplace, woven.  For the hum of the cotton-mills is the newest and
most significant thing in the New South to-day.  All through the
Carolinas and Georgia, away down to Mexico, rise these gaunt red
buildings, bare and homely, and yet so busy and noisy withal that they
scarce seem to belong to the slow and sleepy land.  Perhaps they sprang
from dragons' teeth.  So the Cotton Kingdom still lives; the world
still bows beneath her sceptre.  Even the markets that once defied the
parvenu have crept one by one across the seas, and then slowly and
reluctantly, but surely, have started toward the Black Belt.

To be sure, there are those who wag their heads knowingly and tell us
that the capital of the Cotton Kingdom has moved from the Black to the
White Belt,--that the Negro of to-day raises not more than half of the
cotton crop.  Such men forget that the cotton crop has doubled, and
more than doubled, since the era of slavery, and that, even granting
their contention, the Negro is still supreme in a Cotton Kingdom larger
than that on which the Confederacy builded its hopes.  So the Negro
forms to-day one of the chief figures in a great world-industry; and
this, for its own sake, and in the light of historic interest, makes
the field-hands of the cotton country worth studying.

We seldom study the condition of the Negro to-day honestly and
carefully.  It is so much easier to assume that we know it all.  Or
perhaps, having already reached conclusions in our own minds, we are
loth to have them disturbed by facts.  And yet how little we really
know of these millions,--of their daily lives and longings, of their
homely joys and sorrows, of their real shortcomings and the meaning of
their crimes!  All this we can only learn by intimate contact with the
masses, and not by wholesale arguments covering millions separate in
time and space, and differing widely in training and culture.  To-day,
then, my reader, let us turn our faces to the Black Belt of Georgia and
seek simply to know the condition of the black farm-laborers of one
county there.

Here in 1890 lived ten thousand Negroes and two thousand whites.  The
country is rich, yet the people are poor.  The keynote of the Black
Belt is debt; not commercial credit, but debt in the sense of continued
inability on the part of the mass of the population to make income
cover expense.  This is the direct heritage of the South from the
wasteful economies of the slave regime; but it was emphasized and
brought to a crisis by the Emancipation of the slaves.  In 1860,
Dougherty County had six thousand slaves, worth at least two and a half
millions of dollars; its farms were estimated at three
millions,--making five and a half millions of property, the value of
which depended largely on the slave system, and on the speculative
demand for land once marvellously rich but already partially
devitalized by careless and exhaustive culture.  The war then meant a
financial crash; in place of the five and a half millions of 1860,
there remained in 1870 only farms valued at less than two millions.
With this came increased competition in cotton culture from the rich
lands of Texas; a steady fall in the normal price of cotton followed,
from about fourteen cents a pound in 1860 until it reached four cents
in 1898.  Such a financial revolution was it that involved the owners
of the cotton-belt in debt.  And if things went ill with the master,
how fared it with the man?

The plantations of Dougherty County in slavery days were not as
imposing and aristocratic as those of Virginia.  The Big House was
smaller and usually one-storied, and sat very near the slave cabins.
Sometimes these cabins stretched off on either side like wings;
sometimes only on one side, forming a double row, or edging the road
that turned into the plantation from the main thoroughfare.  The form
and disposition of the laborers' cabins throughout the Black Belt is
to-day the same as in slavery days.  Some live in the self-same cabins,
others in cabins rebuilt on the sites of the old.  All are sprinkled in
little groups over the face of the land, centering about some
dilapidated Big House where the head-tenant or agent lives.  The
general character and arrangement of these dwellings remains on the
whole unaltered.  There were in the county, outside the corporate town
of Albany, about fifteen hundred Negro families in 1898.  Out of all
these, only a single family occupied a house with seven rooms; only
fourteen have five rooms or more.  The mass live in one- and two-room
homes.

The size and arrangements of a people's homes are no unfair index of
their condition.  If, then, we inquire more carefully into these Negro
homes, we find much that is unsatisfactory.  All over the face of the
land is the one-room cabin,--now standing in the shadow of the Big
House, now staring at the dusty road, now rising dark and sombre amid
the green of the cotton-fields.  It is nearly always old and bare,
built of rough boards, and neither plastered nor ceiled.  Light and
ventilation are supplied by the single door and by the square hole in
the wall with its wooden shutter.  There is no glass, porch, or
ornamentation without.  Within is a fireplace, black and smoky, and
usually unsteady with age.  A bed or two, a table, a wooden chest, and
a few chairs compose the furniture; while a stray show-bill or a
newspaper makes up the decorations for the walls.  Now and then one may
find such a cabin kept scrupulously neat, with merry steaming
fireplaces and hospitable door; but the majority are dirty and
dilapidated, smelling of eating and sleeping, poorly ventilated, and
anything but homes.

Above all, the cabins are crowded.  We have come to associate crowding
with homes in cities almost exclusively.  This is primarily because we
have so little accurate knowledge of country life.  Here in Dougherty
County one may find families of eight and ten occupying one or two
rooms, and for every ten rooms of house accommodation for the Negroes
there are twenty-five persons.  The worst tenement abominations of New
York do not have above twenty-two persons for every ten rooms.  Of
course, one small, close room in a city, without a yard, is in many
respects worse than the larger single country room.  In other respects
it is better; it has glass windows, a decent chimney, and a trustworthy
floor.  The single great advantage of the Negro peasant is that he may
spend most of his life outside his hovel, in the open fields.

There are four chief causes of these wretched homes: First, long custom
born of slavery has assigned such homes to Negroes; white laborers
would be offered better accommodations, and might, for that and similar
reasons, give better work.  Secondly, the Negroes, used to such
accommodations, do not as a rule demand better; they do not know what
better houses mean.  Thirdly, the landlords as a class have not yet
come to realize that it is a good business investment to raise the
standard of living among labor by slow and judicious methods; that a
Negro laborer who demands three rooms and fifty cents a day would give
more efficient work and leave a larger profit than a discouraged toiler
herding his family in one room and working for thirty cents.  Lastly,
among such conditions of life there are few incentives to make the
laborer become a better farmer.  If he is ambitious, he moves to town
or tries other labor; as a tenant-farmer his outlook is almost
hopeless, and following it as a makeshift, he takes the house that is
given him without protest.

In such homes, then, these Negro peasants live.  The families are both
small and large; there are many single tenants,--widows and bachelors,
and remnants of broken groups.  The system of labor and the size of the
houses both tend to the breaking up of family groups: the grown
children go away as contract hands or migrate to town, the sister goes
into service; and so one finds many families with hosts of babies, and
many newly married couples, but comparatively few families with
half-grown and grown sons and daughters.  The average size of Negro
families has undoubtedly decreased since the war, primarily from
economic stress.  In Russia over a third of the bridegrooms and over
half the brides are under twenty; the same was true of the antebellum
Negroes.  Today, however, very few of the boys and less than a fifth of
the Negro girls under twenty are married.  The young men marry between
the ages of twenty-five and thirty-five; the young women between twenty
and thirty.  Such postponement is due to the difficulty of earning
sufficient to rear and support a family; and it undoubtedly leads, in
the country districts, to sexual immorality.  The form of this
immorality, however, is very seldom that of prostitution, and less
frequently that of illegitimacy than one would imagine.  Rather, it
takes the form of separation and desertion after a family group has
been formed.  The number of separated persons is thirty-five to the
thousand,--a very large number.  It would of course be unfair to
compare this number with divorce statistics, for many of these
separated women are in reality widowed, were the truth known, and in
other cases the separation is not permanent.  Nevertheless, here lies
the seat of greatest moral danger.  There is little or no prostitution
among these Negroes, and over three-fourths of the families, as found
by house-to-house investigation, deserve to be classed as decent people
with considerable regard for female chastity.  To be sure, the ideas of
the mass would not suit New England, and there are many loose habits
and notions.  Yet the rate of illegitimacy is undoubtedly lower than in
Austria or Italy, and the women as a class are modest.  The plague-spot
in sexual relations is easy marriage and easy separation.  This is no
sudden development, nor the fruit of Emancipation.  It is the plain
heritage from slavery.  In those days Sam, with his master's consent,
"took up" with Mary.  No ceremony was necessary, and in the busy life
of the great plantations of the Black Belt it was usually dispensed
with.  If now the master needed Sam's work in another plantation or in
another part of the same plantation, or if he took a notion to sell the
slave, Sam's married life with Mary was usually unceremoniously broken,
and then it was clearly to the master's interest to have both of them
take new mates.  This widespread custom of two centuries has not been
eradicated in thirty years.  To-day Sam's grandson "takes up" with a
woman without license or ceremony; they live together decently and
honestly, and are, to all intents and purposes, man and wife.
Sometimes these unions are never broken until death; but in too many
cases family quarrels, a roving spirit, a rival suitor, or perhaps more
frequently the hopeless battle to support a family, lead to separation,
and a broken household is the result.  The Negro church has done much
to stop this practice, and now most marriage ceremonies are performed
by the pastors.  Nevertheless, the evil is still deep seated, and only
a general raising of the standard of living will finally cure it.

Looking now at the county black population as a whole, it is fair to
characterize it as poor and ignorant.  Perhaps ten per cent compose the
well-to-do and the best of the laborers, while at least nine per cent
are thoroughly lewd and vicious.  The rest, over eighty per cent, are
poor and ignorant, fairly honest and well meaning, plodding, and to a
degree shiftless, with some but not great sexual looseness.  Such class
lines are by no means fixed; they vary, one might almost say, with the
price of cotton.  The degree of ignorance cannot easily be expressed.
We may say, for instance, that nearly two-thirds of them cannot read or
write.  This but partially expresses the fact.  They are ignorant of
the world about them, of modern economic organization, of the function
of government, of individual worth and possibilities,--of nearly all
those things which slavery in self-defence had to keep them from
learning.  Much that the white boy imbibes from his earliest social
atmosphere forms the puzzling problems of the black boy's mature years.
America is not another word for Opportunity to all her sons.

It is easy for us to lose ourselves in details in endeavoring to grasp
and comprehend the real condition of a mass of human beings.  We often
forget that each unit in the mass is a throbbing human soul.  Ignorant
it may be, and poverty stricken, black and curious in limb and ways and
thought; and yet it loves and hates, it toils and tires, it laughs and
weeps its bitter tears, and looks in vague and awful longing at the
grim horizon of its life,--all this, even as you and I. These black
thousands are not in reality lazy; they are improvident and careless;
they insist on breaking the monotony of toil with a glimpse at the
great town-world on Saturday; they have their loafers and their
rascals; but the great mass of them work continuously and faithfully
for a return, and under circumstances that would call forth equal
voluntary effort from few if any other modern laboring class.  Over
eighty-eight per cent of them--men, women, and children--are farmers.
Indeed, this is almost the only industry.  Most of the children get
their schooling after the "crops are laid by," and very few there are
that stay in school after the spring work has begun.  Child-labor is to
be found here in some of its worst phases, as fostering ignorance and
stunting physical development.  With the grown men of the county there
is little variety in work: thirteen hundred are farmers, and two
hundred are laborers, teamsters, etc., including twenty-four artisans,
ten merchants, twenty-one preachers, and four teachers.  This
narrowness of life reaches its maximum among the women: thirteen
hundred and fifty of these are farm laborers, one hundred are servants
and washerwomen, leaving sixty-five housewives, eight teachers, and six
seamstresses.

Among this people there is no leisure class.  We often forget that in
the United States over half the youth and adults are not in the world
earning incomes, but are making homes, learning of the world, or
resting after the heat of the strife.  But here ninety-six per cent are
toiling; no one with leisure to turn the bare and cheerless cabin into
a home, no old folks to sit beside the fire and hand down traditions of
the past; little of careless happy childhood and dreaming youth.  The
dull monotony of daily toil is broken only by the gayety of the
thoughtless and the Saturday trip to town.  The toil, like all farm
toil, is monotonous, and here there are little machinery and few tools
to relieve its burdensome drudgery.  But with all this, it is work in
the pure open air, and this is something in a day when fresh air is
scarce.

The land on the whole is still fertile, despite long abuse.  For nine
or ten months in succession the crops will come if asked: garden
vegetables in April, grain in May, melons in June and July, hay in
August, sweet potatoes in September, and cotton from then to Christmas.
And yet on two-thirds of the land there is but one crop, and that
leaves the toilers in debt.  Why is this?

Away down the Baysan road, where the broad flat fields are flanked by
great oak forests, is a plantation; many thousands of acres it used to
run, here and there, and beyond the great wood.  Thirteen hundred human
beings here obeyed the call of one,--were his in body, and largely in
soul.  One of them lives there yet,--a short, stocky man, his
dull-brown face seamed and drawn, and his tightly curled hair
gray-white.  The crops?  Just tolerable, he said; just tolerable.
Getting on?  No--he wasn't getting on at all.  Smith of Albany
"furnishes" him, and his rent is eight hundred pounds of cotton.  Can't
make anything at that.  Why didn't he buy land!  Humph!  Takes money to
buy land.  And he turns away.  Free!  The most piteous thing amid all
the black ruin of war-time, amid the broken fortunes of the masters,
the blighted hopes of mothers and maidens, and the fall of an
empire,--the most piteous thing amid all this was the black freedman
who threw down his hoe because the world called him free.  What did
such a mockery of freedom mean?  Not a cent of money, not an inch of
land, not a mouthful of victuals,--not even ownership of the rags on
his back.  Free!  On Saturday, once or twice a month, the old master,
before the war, used to dole out bacon and meal to his Negroes.  And
after the first flush of freedom wore off, and his true helplessness
dawned on the freedman, he came back and picked up his hoe, and old
master still doled out his bacon and meal.  The legal form of service
was theoretically far different; in practice, task-work or "cropping"
was substituted for daily toil in gangs; and the slave gradually became
a metayer, or tenant on shares, in name, but a laborer with
indeterminate wages in fact.

Still the price of cotton fell, and gradually the landlords deserted
their plantations, and the reign of the merchant began.  The merchant
of the Black Belt is a curious institution,--part banker, part
landlord, part banker, and part despot.  His store, which used most
frequently to stand at the cross-roads and become the centre of a
weekly village, has now moved to town; and thither the Negro tenant
follows him.  The merchant keeps everything,--clothes and shoes, coffee
and sugar, pork and meal, canned and dried goods, wagons and ploughs,
seed and fertilizer,--and what he has not in stock he can give you an
order for at the store across the way.  Here, then, comes the tenant,
Sam Scott, after he has contracted with some absent landlord's agent
for hiring forty acres of land; he fingers his hat nervously until the
merchant finishes his morning chat with Colonel Saunders, and calls
out, "Well, Sam, what do you want?"  Sam wants him to "furnish"
him,--i.e., to advance him food and clothing for the year, and perhaps
seed and tools, until his crop is raised and sold.  If Sam seems a
favorable subject, he and the merchant go to a lawyer, and Sam executes
a chattel mortgage on his mule and wagon in return for seed and a
week's rations.  As soon as the green cotton-leaves appear above the
ground, another mortgage is given on the "crop."  Every Saturday, or at
longer intervals, Sam calls upon the merchant for his "rations"; a
family of five usually gets about thirty pounds of fat side-pork and a
couple of bushels of cornmeal a month.  Besides this, clothing and
shoes must be furnished; if Sam or his family is sick, there are orders
on the druggist and doctor; if the mule wants shoeing, an order on the
blacksmith, etc.  If Sam is a hard worker and crops promise well, he is
often encouraged to buy more,--sugar, extra clothes, perhaps a buggy.
But he is seldom encouraged to save.  When cotton rose to ten cents
last fall, the shrewd merchants of Dougherty County sold a thousand
buggies in one season, mostly to black men.

The security offered for such transactions--a crop and chattel
mortgage--may at first seem slight.  And, indeed, the merchants tell
many a true tale of shiftlessness and cheating; of cotton picked at
night, mules disappearing, and tenants absconding.  But on the whole
the merchant of the Black Belt is the most prosperous man in the
section.  So skilfully and so closely has he drawn the bonds of the law
about the tenant, that the black man has often simply to choose between
pauperism and crime; he "waives" all homestead exemptions in his
contract; he cannot touch his own mortgaged crop, which the laws put
almost in the full control of the land-owner and of the merchant.  When
the crop is growing the merchant watches it like a hawk; as soon as it
is ready for market he takes possession of it, sells it, pays the
landowner his rent, subtracts his bill for supplies, and if, as
sometimes happens, there is anything left, he hands it over to the
black serf for his Christmas celebration.

The direct result of this system is an all-cotton scheme of agriculture
and the continued bankruptcy of the tenant.  The currency of the Black
Belt is cotton.  It is a crop always salable for ready money, not
usually subject to great yearly fluctuations in price, and one which
the Negroes know how to raise.  The landlord therefore demands his rent
in cotton, and the merchant will accept mortgages on no other crop.
There is no use asking the black tenant, then, to diversify his
crops,--he cannot under this system.  Moreover, the system is bound to
bankrupt the tenant.  I remember once meeting a little one-mule wagon
on the River road.  A young black fellow sat in it driving listlessly,
his elbows on his knees.  His dark-faced wife sat beside him, stolid,
silent.

"Hello!" cried my driver,--he has a most imprudent way of addressing
these people, though they seem used to it,--"what have you got there?"

"Meat and meal," answered the man, stopping.  The meat lay uncovered in
the bottom of the wagon,--a great thin side of fat pork covered with
salt; the meal was in a white bushel bag.

"What did you pay for that meat?"

"Ten cents a pound."  It could have been bought for six or seven cents
cash.

"And the meal?"

"Two dollars."  One dollar and ten cents is the cash price in town.
Here was a man paying five dollars for goods which he could have bought
for three dollars cash, and raised for one dollar or one dollar and a
half.

Yet it is not wholly his fault.  The Negro farmer started
behind,--started in debt.  This was not his choosing, but the crime of
this happy-go-lucky nation which goes blundering along with its
Reconstruction tragedies, its Spanish war interludes and Philippine
matinees, just as though God really were dead.  Once in debt, it is no
easy matter for a whole race to emerge.

In the year of low-priced cotton, 1898, out of three hundred tenant
families one hundred and seventy-five ended their year's work in debt
to the extent of fourteen thousand dollars; fifty cleared nothing, and
the remaining seventy-five made a total profit of sixteen hundred
dollars.  The net indebtedness of the black tenant families of the
whole county must have been at least sixty thousand dollars.  In a more
prosperous year the situation is far better; but on the average the
majority of tenants end the year even, or in debt, which means that
they work for board and clothes.  Such an economic organization is
radically wrong.  Whose is the blame?

The underlying causes of this situation are complicated but
discernible.  And one of the chief, outside the carelessness of the
nation in letting the slave start with nothing, is the widespread
opinion among the merchants and employers of the Black Belt that only
by the slavery of debt can the Negro be kept at work.  Without doubt,
some pressure was necessary at the beginning of the free-labor system
to keep the listless and lazy at work; and even to-day the mass of the
Negro laborers need stricter guardianship than most Northern laborers.
Behind this honest and widespread opinion dishonesty and cheating of
the ignorant laborers have a good chance to take refuge.  And to all
this must be added the obvious fact that a slave ancestry and a system
of unrequited toil has not improved the efficiency or temper of the
mass of black laborers.  Nor is this peculiar to Sambo; it has in
history been just as true of John and Hans, of Jacques and Pat, of all
ground-down peasantries.  Such is the situation of the mass of the
Negroes in the Black Belt to-day; and they are thinking about it.
Crime, and a cheap and dangerous socialism, are the inevitable results
of this pondering.  I see now that ragged black man sitting on a log,
aimlessly whittling a stick.  He muttered to me with the murmur of many
ages, when he said: "White man sit down whole year; Nigger work day and
night and make crop; Nigger hardly gits bread and meat; white man
sittin' down gits all. It's wrong." And what do the better classes of
Negroes do to improve their situation?  One of two things: if any way
possible, they buy land; if not, they migrate to town.  Just as
centuries ago it was no easy thing for the serf to escape into the
freedom of town-life, even so to-day there are hindrances laid in the
way of county laborers.  In considerable parts of all the Gulf States,
and especially in Mississippi, Louisiana, and Arkansas, the Negroes on
the plantations in the back-country districts are still held at forced
labor practically without wages.  Especially is this true in districts
where the farmers are composed of the more ignorant class of poor
whites, and the Negroes are beyond the reach of schools and intercourse
with their advancing fellows.  If such a peon should run away, the
sheriff, elected by white suffrage, can usually be depended on to catch
the fugitive, return him, and ask no questions.  If he escape to
another county, a charge of petty thieving, easily true, can be
depended upon to secure his return.  Even if some unduly officious
person insist upon a trial, neighborly comity will probably make his
conviction sure, and then the labor due the county can easily be bought
by the master.  Such a system is impossible in the more civilized parts
of the South, or near the large towns and cities; but in those vast
stretches of land beyond the telegraph and the newspaper the spirit of
the Thirteenth Amendment is sadly broken.  This represents the lowest
economic depths of the black American peasant; and in a study of the
rise and condition of the Negro freeholder we must trace his economic
progress from the modern serfdom.

Even in the better-ordered country districts of the South the free
movement of agricultural laborers is hindered by the migration-agent
laws.  The "Associated Press" recently informed the world of the arrest
of a young white man in Southern Georgia who represented the "Atlantic
Naval Supplies Company," and who "was caught in the act of enticing
hands from the turpentine farm of Mr. John Greer."  The crime for which
this young man was arrested is taxed five hundred dollars for each
county in which the employment agent proposes to gather laborers for
work outside the State.  Thus the Negroes' ignorance of the
labor-market outside his own vicinity is increased rather than
diminished by the laws of nearly every Southern State.

Similar to such measures is the unwritten law of the back districts and
small towns of the South, that the character of all Negroes unknown to
the mass of the community must be vouched for by some white man.  This
is really a revival of the old Roman idea of the patron under whose
protection the new-made freedman was put.  In many instances this
system has been of great good to the Negro, and very often under the
protection and guidance of the former master's family, or other white
friends, the freedman progressed in wealth and morality.  But the same
system has in other cases resulted in the refusal of whole communities
to recognize the right of a Negro to change his habitation and to be
master of his own fortunes.  A black stranger in Baker County, Georgia,
for instance, is liable to be stopped anywhere on the public highway
and made to state his business to the satisfaction of any white
interrogator.  If he fails to give a suitable answer, or seems too
independent or "sassy," he may be arrested or summarily driven away.

Thus it is that in the country districts of the South, by written or
unwritten law, peonage, hindrances to the migration of labor, and a
system of white patronage exists over large areas.  Besides this, the
chance for lawless oppression and illegal exactions is vastly greater
in the country than in the city, and nearly all the more serious race
disturbances of the last decade have arisen from disputes in the count
between master and man,--as, for instance, the Sam Hose affair.  As a
result of such a situation, there arose, first, the Black Belt; and,
second, the Migration to Town.  The Black Belt was not, as many
assumed, a movement toward fields of labor under more genial climatic
conditions; it was primarily a huddling for self-protection,--a massing
of the black population for mutual defence in order to secure the peace
and tranquillity necessary to economic advance.  This movement took
place between Emancipation and 1880, and only partially accomplished
the desired results.  The rush to town since 1880 is the
counter-movement of men disappointed in the economic opportunities of
the Black Belt.

In Dougherty County, Georgia, one can see easily the results of this
experiment in huddling for protection.  Only ten per cent of the adult
population was born in the county, and yet the blacks outnumber the
whites four or five to one.  There is undoubtedly a security to the
blacks in their very numbers,--a personal freedom from arbitrary
treatment, which makes hundreds of laborers cling to Dougherty in spite
of low wages and economic distress.  But a change is coming, and slowly
but surely even here the agricultural laborers are drifting to town and
leaving the broad acres behind.  Why is this?  Why do not the Negroes
become land-owners, and build up the black landed peasantry, which has
for a generation and more been the dream of philanthropist and
statesman?

To the car-window sociologist, to the man who seeks to understand and
know the South by devoting the few leisure hours of a holiday trip to
unravelling the snarl of centuries,--to such men very often the whole
trouble with the black field-hand may be summed up by Aunt Ophelia's
word, "Shiftless!"  They have noted repeatedly scenes like one I saw
last summer.  We were riding along the highroad to town at the close of
a long hot day.  A couple of young black fellows passed us in a
muleteam, with several bushels of loose corn in the ear.  One was
driving, listlessly bent forward, his elbows on his knees,--a
happy-go-lucky, careless picture of irresponsibility.  The other was
fast asleep in the bottom of the wagon.  As we passed we noticed an ear
of corn fall from the wagon.  They never saw it,--not they.  A rod
farther on we noted another ear on the ground; and between that
creeping mule and town we counted twenty-six ears of corn.  Shiftless?
Yes, the personification of shiftlessness.  And yet follow those boys:
they are not lazy; to-morrow morning they'll be up with the sun; they
work hard when they do work, and they work willingly.  They have no
sordid, selfish, money-getting ways, but rather a fine disdain for mere
cash.  They'll loaf before your face and work behind your back with
good-natured honesty.  They'll steal a watermelon, and hand you back
your lost purse intact.  Their great defect as laborers lies in their
lack of incentive beyond the mere pleasure of physical exertion.  They
are careless because they have not found that it pays to be careful;
they are improvident because the improvident ones of their acquaintance
get on about as well as the provident.  Above all, they cannot see why
they should take unusual pains to make the white man's land better, or
to fatten his mule, or save his corn.  On the other hand, the white
land-owner argues that any attempt to improve these laborers by
increased responsibility, or higher wages, or better homes, or land of
their own, would be sure to result in failure.  He shows his Northern
visitor the scarred and wretched land; the ruined mansions, the
worn-out soil and mortgaged acres, and says, This is Negro freedom!

Now it happens that both master and man have just enough argument on
their respective sides to make it difficult for them to understand each
other.  The Negro dimly personifies in the white man all his ills and
misfortunes; if he is poor, it is because the white man seizes the
fruit of his toil; if he is ignorant, it is because the white man gives
him neither time nor facilities to learn; and, indeed, if any
misfortune happens to him, it is because of some hidden machinations of
"white folks."  On the other hand, the masters and the masters' sons
have never been able to see why the Negro, instead of settling down to
be day-laborers for bread and clothes, are infected with a silly desire
to rise in the world, and why they are sulky, dissatisfied, and
careless, where their fathers were happy and dumb and faithful.  "Why,
you niggers have an easier time than I do," said a puzzled Albany
merchant to his black customer.  "Yes," he replied, "and so does yo'
hogs."

Taking, then, the dissatisfied and shiftless field-hand as a
starting-point, let us inquire how the black thousands of Dougherty
have struggled from him up toward their ideal, and what that ideal is.
All social struggle is evidenced by the rise, first of economic, then
of social classes, among a homogeneous population.  To-day the
following economic classes are plainly differentiated among these
Negroes.

A "submerged tenth" of croppers, with a few paupers; forty per cent who
are metayers and thirty-nine per cent of semi-metayers and
wage-laborers.  There are left five per cent of money-renters and six
per cent of freeholders,--the "Upper Ten" of the land.  The croppers
are entirely without capital, even in the limited sense of food or
money to keep them from seed-time to harvest.  All they furnish is
their labor; the land-owner furnishes land, stock, tools, seed, and
house; and at the end of the year the laborer gets from a third to a
half of the crop.  Out of his share, however, comes pay and interest
for food and clothing advanced him during the year.  Thus we have a
laborer without capital and without wages, and an employer whose
capital is largely his employees' wages.  It is an unsatisfactory
arrangement, both for hirer and hired, and is usually in vogue on poor
land with hard-pressed owners.

Above the croppers come the great mass of the black population who work
the land on their own responsibility, paying rent in cotton and
supported by the crop-mortgage system.  After the war this system was
attractive to the freedmen on account of its larger freedom and its
possibility for making a surplus.  But with the carrying out of the
crop-lien system, the deterioration of the land, and the slavery of
debt, the position of the metayers has sunk to a dead level of
practically unrewarded toil.  Formerly all tenants had some capital,
and often considerable; but absentee landlordism, rising rack-rent, and
failing cotton have stripped them well-nigh of all, and probably not
over half of them to-day own their mules.  The change from cropper to
tenant was accomplished by fixing the rent.  If, now, the rent fixed
was reasonable, this was an incentive to the tenant to strive.  On the
other hand, if the rent was too high, or if the land deteriorated, the
result was to discourage and check the efforts of the black peasantry.
There is no doubt that the latter case is true; that in Dougherty
County every economic advantage of the price of cotton in market and of
the strivings of the tenant has been taken advantage of by the
landlords and merchants, and swallowed up in rent and interest.  If
cotton rose in price, the rent rose even higher; if cotton fell, the
rent remained or followed reluctantly.  If the tenant worked hard and
raised a large crop, his rent was raised the next year; if that year
the crop failed, his corn was confiscated and his mule sold for debt.
There were, of course, exceptions to this,--cases of personal kindness
and forbearance; but in the vast majority of cases the rule was to
extract the uttermost farthing from the mass of the black farm laborers.

The average metayer pays from twenty to thirty per cent of his crop in
rent.  The result of such rack-rent can only be evil,--abuse and
neglect of the soil, deterioration in the character of the laborers,
and a widespread sense of injustice.  "Wherever the country is poor,"
cried Arthur Young, "it is in the hands of metayers," and "their
condition is more wretched than that of day-laborers."  He was talking
of Italy a century ago; but he might have been talking of Dougherty
County to-day.  And especially is that true to-day which he declares
was true in France before the Revolution: "The metayers are considered
as little better than menial servants, removable at pleasure, and
obliged to conform in all things to the will of the landlords."  On
this low plane half the black population of Dougherty County--perhaps
more than half the black millions of this land--are to-day struggling.

A degree above these we may place those laborers who receive money
wages for their work.  Some receive a house with perhaps a garden-spot;
then supplies of food and clothing are advanced, and certain fixed
wages are given at the end of the year, varying from thirty to sixty
dollars, out of which the supplies must be paid for, with interest.
About eighteen per cent of the population belong to this class of
semi-metayers, while twenty-two per cent are laborers paid by the month
or year, and are either "furnished" by their own savings or perhaps
more usually by some merchant who takes his chances of payment.  Such
laborers receive from thirty-five to fifty cents a day during the
working season.  They are usually young unmarried persons, some being
women; and when they marry they sink to the class of metayers, or, more
seldom, become renters.

The renters for fixed money rentals are the first of the emerging
classes, and form five per cent of the families.  The sole advantage of
this small class is their freedom to choose their crops, and the
increased responsibility which comes through having money transactions.
While some of the renters differ little in condition from the metayers,
yet on the whole they are more intelligent and responsible persons, and
are the ones who eventually become land-owners.  Their better character
and greater shrewdness enable them to gain, perhaps to demand, better
terms in rents; rented farms, varying from forty to a hundred acres,
bear an average rental of about fifty-four dollars a year.  The men who
conduct such farms do not long remain renters; either they sink to
metayers, or with a successful series of harvests rise to be
land-owners.

In 1870 the tax-books of Dougherty report no Negroes as landholders.
If there were any such at that time,--and there may have been a
few,--their land was probably held in the name of some white patron,--a
method not uncommon during slavery.  In 1875 ownership of land had
begun with seven hundred and fifty acres; ten years later this had
increased to over sixty-five hundred acres, to nine thousand acres in
1890 and ten thousand in 1900.  The total assessed property has in this
same period risen from eighty thousand dollars in 1875 to two hundred
and forty thousand dollars in 1900.

Two circumstances complicate this development and make it in some
respects difficult to be sure of the real tendencies; they are the
panic of 1893, and the low price of cotton in 1898.  Besides this, the
system of assessing property in the country districts of Georgia is
somewhat antiquated and of uncertain statistical value; there are no
assessors, and each man makes a sworn return to a tax-receiver.  Thus
public opinion plays a large part, and the returns vary strangely from
year to year.  Certainly these figures show the small amount of
accumulated capital among the Negroes, and the consequent large
dependence of their property on temporary prosperity.  They have little
to tide over a few years of economic depression, and are at the mercy
of the cotton-market far more than the whites.  And thus the
land-owners, despite their marvellous efforts, are really a transient
class, continually being depleted by those who fall back into the class
of renters or metayers, and augmented by newcomers from the masses.  Of
one hundred land-owners in 1898, half had bought their land since 1893,
a fourth between 1890 and 1893, a fifth between 1884 and 1890, and the
rest between 1870 and 1884.  In all, one hundred and eighty-five
Negroes have owned land in this county since 1875.

If all the black land-owners who had ever held land here had kept it or
left it in the hands of black men, the Negroes would have owned nearer
thirty thousand acres than the fifteen thousand they now hold.  And yet
these fifteen thousand acres are a creditable showing,--a proof of no
little weight of the worth and ability of the Negro people.  If they
had been given an economic start at Emancipation, if they had been in
an enlightened and rich community which really desired their best good,
then we might perhaps call such a result small or even insignificant.
But for a few thousand poor ignorant field-hands, in the face of
poverty, a falling market, and social stress, to save and capitalize
two hundred thousand dollars in a generation has meant a tremendous
effort.  The rise of a nation, the pressing forward of a social class,
means a bitter struggle, a hard and soul-sickening battle with the
world such as few of the more favored classes know or appreciate.

Out of the hard economic conditions of this portion of the Black Belt,
only six per cent of the population have succeeded in emerging into
peasant proprietorship; and these are not all firmly fixed, but grow
and shrink in number with the wavering of the cotton-market.  Fully
ninety-four per cent have struggled for land and failed, and half of
them sit in hopeless serfdom.  For these there is one other avenue of
escape toward which they have turned in increasing numbers, namely,
migration to town.  A glance at the distribution of land among the
black owners curiously reveals this fact.  In 1898 the holdings were as
follows: Under forty acres, forty-nine families; forty to two hundred
and fifty acres, seventeen families; two hundred and fifty to one
thousand acres, thirteen families; one thousand or more acres, two
families.  Now in 1890 there were forty-four holdings, but only nine of
these were under forty acres.  The great increase of holdings, then,
has come in the buying of small homesteads near town, where their
owners really share in the town life; this is a part of the rush to
town.  And for every land-owner who has thus hurried away from the
narrow and hard conditions of country life, how many field-hands, how
many tenants, how many ruined renters, have joined that long
procession?  Is it not strange compensation?  The sin of the country
districts is visited on the town, and the social sores of city life
to-day may, here in Dougherty County, and perhaps in many places near
and far, look for their final healing without the city walls.




IX

Of the Sons of Master and Man

  Life treads on life, and heart on heart;
  We press too close in church and mart
  To keep a dream or grave apart.

  MRS. BROWNING.


The world-old phenomenon of the contact of diverse races of men is to
have new exemplification during the new century.  Indeed, the
characteristic of our age is the contact of European civilization with
the world's undeveloped peoples.  Whatever we may say of the results of
such contact in the past, it certainly forms a chapter in human action
not pleasant to look back upon.  War, murder, slavery, extermination,
and debauchery,--this has again and again been the result of carrying
civilization and the blessed gospel to the isles of the sea and the
heathen without the law.  Nor does it altogether satisfy the conscience
of the modern world to be told complacently that all this has been
right and proper, the fated triumph of strength over weakness, of
righteousness over evil, of superiors over inferiors.  It would
certainly be soothing if one could readily believe all this; and yet
there are too many ugly facts for everything to be thus easily
explained away.  We feel and know that there are many delicate
differences in race psychology, numberless changes that our crude
social measurements are not yet able to follow minutely, which explain
much of history and social development.  At the same time, too, we know
that these considerations have never adequately explained or excused
the triumph of brute force and cunning over weakness and innocence.

It is, then, the strife of all honorable men of the twentieth century
to see that in the future competition of races the survival of the
fittest shall mean the triumph of the good, the beautiful, and the
true; that we may be able to preserve for future civilization all that
is really fine and noble and strong, and not continue to put a premium
on greed and impudence and cruelty.  To bring this hope to fruition, we
are compelled daily to turn more and more to a conscientious study of
the phenomena of race-contact,--to a study frank and fair, and not
falsified and colored by our wishes or our fears.  And we have in the
South as fine a field for such a study as the world affords,--a field,
to be sure, which the average American scientist deems somewhat beneath
his dignity, and which the average man who is not a scientist knows all
about, but nevertheless a line of study which by reason of the enormous
race complications with which God seems about to punish this nation
must increasingly claim our sober attention, study, and thought, we
must ask, what are the actual relations of whites and blacks in the
South? and we must be answered, not by apology or fault-finding, but by
a plain, unvarnished tale.

In the civilized life of to-day the contact of men and their relations
to each other fall in a few main lines of action and communication:
there is, first, the physical proximity of home and dwelling-places,
the way in which neighborhoods group themselves, and the contiguity of
neighborhoods.  Secondly, and in our age chiefest, there are the
economic relations,--the methods by which individuals cooperate for
earning a living, for the mutual satisfaction of wants, for the
production of wealth.  Next, there are the political relations, the
cooperation in social control, in group government, in laying and
paying the burden of taxation.  In the fourth place there are the less
tangible but highly important forms of intellectual contact and
commerce, the interchange of ideas through conversation and conference,
through periodicals and libraries; and, above all, the gradual
formation for each community of that curious tertium quid which we call
public opinion.  Closely allied with this come the various forms of
social contact in everyday life, in travel, in theatres, in house
gatherings, in marrying and giving in marriage.  Finally, there are the
varying forms of religious enterprise, of moral teaching and benevolent
endeavor.  These are the principal ways in which men living in the same
communities are brought into contact with each other.  It is my present
task, therefore, to indicate, from my point of view, how the black race
in the South meet and mingle with the whites in these matters of
everyday life.

First, as to physical dwelling.  It is usually possible to draw in
nearly every Southern community a physical color-line on the map, on
the one side of which whites dwell and on the other Negroes.  The
winding and intricacy of the geographical color-line varies, of course,
in different communities.  I know some towns where a straight line
drawn through the middle of the main street separates nine-tenths of
the whites from nine-tenths of the blacks.  In other towns the older
settlement of whites has been encircled by a broad band of blacks; in
still other cases little settlements or nuclei of blacks have sprung up
amid surrounding whites.  Usually in cities each street has its
distinctive color, and only now and then do the colors meet in close
proximity.  Even in the country something of this segregation is
manifest in the smaller areas, and of course in the larger phenomena of
the Black Belt.

All this segregation by color is largely independent of that natural
clustering by social grades common to all communities.  A Negro slum
may be in dangerous proximity to a white residence quarter, while it is
quite common to find a white slum planted in the heart of a respectable
Negro district.  One thing, however, seldom occurs: the best of the
whites and the best of the Negroes almost never live in anything like
close proximity.  It thus happens that in nearly every Southern town
and city, both whites and blacks see commonly the worst of each other.
This is a vast change from the situation in the past, when, through the
close contact of master and house-servant in the patriarchal big house,
one found the best of both races in close contact and sympathy, while
at the same time the squalor and dull round of toil among the
field-hands was removed from the sight and hearing of the family.  One
can easily see how a person who saw slavery thus from his father's
parlors, and sees freedom on the streets of a great city, fails to
grasp or comprehend the whole of the new picture.  On the other hand,
the settled belief of the mass of the Negroes that the Southern white
people do not have the black man's best interests at heart has been
intensified in later years by this continual daily contact of the
better class of blacks with the worst representatives of the white race.

Coming now to the economic relations of the races, we are on ground
made familiar by study, much discussion, and no little philanthropic
effort.  And yet with all this there are many essential elements in the
cooperation of Negroes and whites for work and wealth that are too
readily overlooked or not thoroughly understood.  The average American
can easily conceive of a rich land awaiting development and filled with
black laborers.  To him the Southern problem is simply that of making
efficient workingmen out of this material, by giving them the requisite
technical skill and the help of invested capital.  The problem,
however, is by no means as simple as this, from the obvious fact that
these workingmen have been trained for centuries as slaves.  They
exhibit, therefore, all the advantages and defects of such training;
they are willing and good-natured, but not self-reliant, provident, or
careful.  If now the economic development of the South is to be pushed
to the verge of exploitation, as seems probable, then we have a mass of
workingmen thrown into relentless competition with the workingmen of
the world, but handicapped by a training the very opposite to that of
the modern self-reliant democratic laborer.  What the black laborer
needs is careful personal guidance, group leadership of men with hearts
in their bosoms, to train them to foresight, carefulness, and honesty.
Nor does it require any fine-spun theories of racial differences to
prove the necessity of such group training after the brains of the race
have been knocked out by two hundred and fifty years of assiduous
education in submission, carelessness, and stealing.  After
Emancipation, it was the plain duty of some one to assume this group
leadership and training of the Negro laborer.  I will not stop here to
inquire whose duty it was--whether that of the white ex-master who had
profited by unpaid toil, or the Northern philanthropist whose
persistence brought on the crisis, or the National Government whose
edict freed the bondmen; I will not stop to ask whose duty it was, but
I insist it was the duty of some one to see that these workingmen were
not left alone and unguided, without capital, without land, without
skill, without economic organization, without even the bald protection
of law, order, and decency,--left in a great land, not to settle down
to slow and careful internal development, but destined to be thrown
almost immediately into relentless and sharp competition with the best
of modern workingmen under an economic system where every participant
is fighting for himself, and too often utterly regardless of the rights
or welfare of his neighbor.

For we must never forget that the economic system of the South to-day
which has succeeded the old regime is not the same system as that of
the old industrial North, of England, or of France, with their
trade-unions, their restrictive laws, their written and unwritten
commercial customs, and their long experience.  It is, rather, a copy
of that England of the early nineteenth century, before the factory
acts,--the England that wrung pity from thinkers and fired the wrath of
Carlyle.  The rod of empire that passed from the hands of Southern
gentlemen in 1865, partly by force, partly by their own petulance, has
never returned to them.  Rather it has passed to those men who have
come to take charge of the industrial exploitation of the New
South,--the sons of poor whites fired with a new thirst for wealth and
power, thrifty and avaricious Yankees, and unscrupulous immigrants.
Into the hands of these men the Southern laborers, white and black,
have fallen; and this to their sorrow.  For the laborers as such, there
is in these new captains of industry neither love nor hate, neither
sympathy nor romance; it is a cold question of dollars and dividends.
Under such a system all labor is bound to suffer.  Even the white
laborers are not yet intelligent, thrifty, and well trained enough to
maintain themselves against the powerful inroads of organized capital.
The results among them, even, are long hours of toil, low wages, child
labor, and lack of protection against usury and cheating.  But among
the black laborers all this is aggravated, first, by a race prejudice
which varies from a doubt and distrust among the best element of whites
to a frenzied hatred among the worst; and, secondly, it is aggravated,
as I have said before, by the wretched economic heritage of the
freedmen from slavery.  With this training it is difficult for the
freedman to learn to grasp the opportunities already opened to him, and
the new opportunities are seldom given him, but go by favor to the
whites.

Left by the best elements of the South with little protection or
oversight, he has been made in law and custom the victim of the worst
and most unscrupulous men in each community.  The crop-lien system
which is depopulating the fields of the South is not simply the result
of shiftlessness on the part of Negroes, but is also the result of
cunningly devised laws as to mortgages, liens, and misdemeanors, which
can be made by conscienceless men to entrap and snare the unwary until
escape is impossible, further toil a farce, and protest a crime.  I
have seen, in the Black Belt of Georgia, an ignorant, honest Negro buy
and pay for a farm in installments three separate times, and then in
the face of law and decency the enterprising American who sold it to
him pocketed the money and deed and left the black man landless, to
labor on his own land at thirty cents a day.  I have seen a black
farmer fall in debt to a white storekeeper, and that storekeeper go to
his farm and strip it of every single marketable article,--mules,
ploughs, stored crops, tools, furniture, bedding, clocks,
looking-glass,--and all this without a sheriff or officer, in the face
of the law for homestead exemptions, and without rendering to a single
responsible person any account or reckoning.  And such proceedings can
happen, and will happen, in any community where a class of ignorant
toilers are placed by custom and race-prejudice beyond the pale of
sympathy and race-brotherhood.  So long as the best elements of a
community do not feel in duty bound to protect and train and care for
the weaker members of their group, they leave them to be preyed upon by
these swindlers and rascals.

This unfortunate economic situation does not mean the hindrance of all
advance in the black South, or the absence of a class of black
landlords and mechanics who, in spite of disadvantages, are
accumulating property and making good citizens.  But it does mean that
this class is not nearly so large as a fairer economic system might
easily make it, that those who survive in the competition are
handicapped so as to accomplish much less than they deserve to, and
that, above all, the personnel of the successful class is left to
chance and accident, and not to any intelligent culling or reasonable
methods of selection.  As a remedy for this, there is but one possible
procedure.  We must accept some of the race prejudice in the South as a
fact,--deplorable in its intensity, unfortunate in results, and
dangerous for the future, but nevertheless a hard fact which only time
can efface.  We cannot hope, then, in this generation, or for several
generations, that the mass of the whites can be brought to assume that
close sympathetic and self-sacrificing leadership of the blacks which
their present situation so eloquently demands.  Such leadership, such
social teaching and example, must come from the blacks themselves.  For
some time men doubted as to whether the Negro could develop such
leaders; but to-day no one seriously disputes the capability of
individual Negroes to assimilate the culture and common sense of modern
civilization, and to pass it on, to some extent at least, to their
fellows.  If this is true, then here is the path out of the economic
situation, and here is the imperative demand for trained Negro leaders
of character and intelligence,--men of skill, men of light and leading,
college-bred men, black captains of industry, and missionaries of
culture; men who thoroughly comprehend and know modern civilization,
and can take hold of Negro communities and raise and train them by
force of precept and example, deep sympathy, and the inspiration of
common blood and ideals.  But if such men are to be effective they must
have some power,--they must be backed by the best public opinion of
these communities, and able to wield for their objects and aims such
weapons as the experience of the world has taught are indispensable to
human progress.

Of such weapons the greatest, perhaps, in the modern world is the power
of the ballot; and this brings me to a consideration of the third form
of contact between whites and blacks in the South,--political activity.

In the attitude of the American mind toward Negro suffrage can be
traced with unusual accuracy the prevalent conceptions of government.
In the fifties we were near enough the echoes of the French Revolution
to believe pretty thoroughly in universal suffrage.  We argued, as we
thought then rather logically, that no social class was so good, so
true, and so disinterested as to be trusted wholly with the political
destiny of its neighbors; that in every state the best arbiters of
their own welfare are the persons directly affected; consequently that
it is only by arming every hand with a ballot,--with the right to have
a voice in the policy of the state,--that the greatest good to the
greatest number could be attained.  To be sure, there were objections
to these arguments, but we thought we had answered them tersely and
convincingly; if some one complained of the ignorance of voters, we
answered, "Educate them."  If another complained of their venality, we
replied, "Disfranchise them or put them in jail."  And, finally, to the
men who feared demagogues and the natural perversity of some human
beings we insisted that time and bitter experience would teach the most
hardheaded.  It was at this time that the question of Negro suffrage in
the South was raised.  Here was a defenceless people suddenly made
free.  How were they to be protected from those who did not believe in
their freedom and were determined to thwart it?  Not by force, said the
North; not by government guardianship, said the South; then by the
ballot, the sole and legitimate defence of a free people, said the
Common Sense of the Nation.  No one thought, at the time, that the
ex-slaves could use the ballot intelligently or very effectively; but
they did think that the possession of so great power by a great class
in the nation would compel their fellows to educate this class to its
intelligent use.

Meantime, new thoughts came to the nation: the inevitable period of
moral retrogression and political trickery that ever follows in the
wake of war overtook us.  So flagrant became the political scandals
that reputable men began to leave politics alone, and politics
consequently became disreputable.  Men began to pride themselves on
having nothing to do with their own government, and to agree tacitly
with those who regarded public office as a private perquisite.  In this
state of mind it became easy to wink at the suppression of the Negro
vote in the South, and to advise self-respecting Negroes to leave
politics entirely alone.  The decent and reputable citizens of the
North who neglected their own civic duties grew hilarious over the
exaggerated importance with which the Negro regarded the franchise.
Thus it easily happened that more and more the better class of Negroes
followed the advice from abroad and the pressure from home, and took no
further interest in politics, leaving to the careless and the venal of
their race the exercise of their rights as voters.  The black vote that
still remained was not trained and educated, but further debauched by
open and unblushing bribery, or force and fraud; until the Negro voter
was thoroughly inoculated with the idea that politics was a method of
private gain by disreputable means.

And finally, now, to-day, when we are awakening to the fact that the
perpetuity of republican institutions on this continent depends on the
purification of the ballot, the civic training of voters, and the
raising of voting to the plane of a solemn duty which a patriotic
citizen neglects to his peril and to the peril of his children's
children,--in this day, when we are striving for a renaissance of civic
virtue, what are we going to say to the black voter of the South?  Are
we going to tell him still that politics is a disreputable and useless
form of human activity?  Are we going to induce the best class of
Negroes to take less and less interest in government, and to give up
their right to take such an interest, without a protest?  I am not
saying a word against all legitimate efforts to purge the ballot of
ignorance, pauperism, and crime.  But few have pretended that the
present movement for disfranchisement in the South is for such a
purpose; it has been plainly and frankly declared in nearly every case
that the object of the disfranchising laws is the elimination of the
black man from politics.

Now, is this a minor matter which has no influence on the main question
of the industrial and intellectual development of the Negro?  Can we
establish a mass of black laborers and artisans and landholders in the
South who, by law and public opinion, have absolutely no voice in
shaping the laws under which they live and work?  Can the modern
organization of industry, assuming as it does free democratic
government and the power and ability of the laboring classes to compel
respect for their welfare,--can this system be carried out in the South
when half its laboring force is voiceless in the public councils and
powerless in its own defence?  To-day the black man of the South has
almost nothing to say as to how much he shall be taxed, or how those
taxes shall be expended; as to who shall execute the laws, and how they
shall do it; as to who shall make the laws, and how they shall be made.
It is pitiable that frantic efforts must be made at critical times to
get law-makers in some States even to listen to the respectful
presentation of the black man's side of a current controversy.  Daily
the Negro is coming more and more to look upon law and justice, not as
protecting safeguards, but as sources of humiliation and oppression.
The laws are made by men who have little interest in him; they are
executed by men who have absolutely no motive for treating the black
people with courtesy or consideration; and, finally, the accused
law-breaker is tried, not by his peers, but too often by men who would
rather punish ten innocent Negroes than let one guilty one escape.

I should be the last one to deny the patent weaknesses and shortcomings
of the Negro people; I should be the last to withhold sympathy from the
white South in its efforts to solve its intricate social problems.  I
freely acknowledged that it is possible, and sometimes best, that a
partially undeveloped people should be ruled by the best of their
stronger and better neighbors for their own good, until such time as
they can start and fight the world's battles alone.  I have already
pointed out how sorely in need of such economic and spiritual guidance
the emancipated Negro was, and I am quite willing to admit that if the
representatives of the best white Southern public opinion were the
ruling and guiding powers in the South to-day the conditions indicated
would be fairly well fulfilled.  But the point I have insisted upon and
now emphasize again, is that the best opinion of the South to-day is
not the ruling opinion.  That to leave the Negro helpless and without a
ballot to-day is to leave him not to the guidance of the best, but
rather to the exploitation and debauchment of the worst; that this is
no truer of the South than of the North,--of the North than of Europe:
in any land, in any country under modern free competition, to lay any
class of weak and despised people, be they white, black, or blue, at
the political mercy of their stronger, richer, and more resourceful
fellows, is a temptation which human nature seldom has withstood and
seldom will withstand.

Moreover, the political status of the Negro in the South is closely
connected with the question of Negro crime.  There can be no doubt that
crime among Negroes has sensibly increased in the last thirty years,
and that there has appeared in the slums of great cities a distinct
criminal class among the blacks.  In explaining this unfortunate
development, we must note two things: (1) that the inevitable result of
Emancipation was to increase crime and criminals, and (2) that the
police system of the South was primarily designed to control slaves.
As to the first point, we must not forget that under a strict slave
system there can scarcely be such a thing as crime.  But when these
variously constituted human particles are suddenly thrown broadcast on
the sea of life, some swim, some sink, and some hang suspended, to be
forced up or down by the chance currents of a busy hurrying world.  So
great an economic and social revolution as swept the South in '63 meant
a weeding out among the Negroes of the incompetents and vicious, the
beginning of a differentiation of social grades.  Now a rising group of
people are not lifted bodily from the ground like an inert solid mass,
but rather stretch upward like a living plant with its roots still
clinging in the mould.  The appearance, therefore, of the Negro
criminal was a phenomenon to be awaited; and while it causes anxiety,
it should not occasion surprise.

Here again the hope for the future depended peculiarly on careful and
delicate dealing with these criminals.  Their offences at first were
those of laziness, carelessness, and impulse, rather than of malignity
or ungoverned viciousness.  Such misdemeanors needed discriminating
treatment, firm but reformatory, with no hint of injustice, and full
proof of guilt.  For such dealing with criminals, white or black, the
South had no machinery, no adequate jails or reformatories; its police
system was arranged to deal with blacks alone, and tacitly assumed that
every white man was ipso facto a member of that police.  Thus grew up a
double system of justice, which erred on the white side by undue
leniency and the practical immunity of red-handed criminals, and erred
on the black side by undue severity, injustice, and lack of
discrimination.  For, as I have said, the police system of the South
was originally designed to keep track of all Negroes, not simply of
criminals; and when the Negroes were freed and the whole South was
convinced of the impossibility of free Negro labor, the first and
almost universal device was to use the courts as a means of reenslaving
the blacks.  It was not then a question of crime, but rather one of
color, that settled a man's conviction on almost any charge.  Thus
Negroes came to look upon courts as instruments of injustice and
oppression, and upon those convicted in them as martyrs and victims.

When, now, the real Negro criminal appeared, and instead of petty
stealing and vagrancy we began to have highway robbery, burglary,
murder, and rape, there was a curious effect on both sides the
color-line: the Negroes refused to believe the evidence of white
witnesses or the fairness of white juries, so that the greatest
deterrent to crime, the public opinion of one's own social caste, was
lost, and the criminal was looked upon as crucified rather than hanged.
On the other hand, the whites, used to being careless as to the guilt
or innocence of accused Negroes, were swept in moments of passion
beyond law, reason, and decency.  Such a situation is bound to increase
crime, and has increased it.  To natural viciousness and vagrancy are
being daily added motives of revolt and revenge which stir up all the
latent savagery of both races and make peaceful attention to economic
development often impossible.

But the chief problem in any community cursed with crime is not the
punishment of the criminals, but the preventing of the young from being
trained to crime.  And here again the peculiar conditions of the South
have prevented proper precautions.  I have seen twelve-year-old boys
working in chains on the public streets of Atlanta, directly in front
of the schools, in company with old and hardened criminals; and this
indiscriminate mingling of men and women and children makes the
chain-gangs perfect schools of crime and debauchery.  The struggle for
reformatories, which has gone on in Virginia, Georgia, and other
States, is the one encouraging sign of the awakening of some
communities to the suicidal results of this policy.

It is the public schools, however, which can be made, outside the
homes, the greatest means of training decent self-respecting citizens.
We have been so hotly engaged recently in discussing trade-schools and
the higher education that the pitiable plight of the public-school
system in the South has almost dropped from view.  Of every five
dollars spent for public education in the State of Georgia, the white
schools get four dollars and the Negro one dollar; and even then the
white public-school system, save in the cities, is bad and cries for
reform.  If this is true of the whites, what of the blacks?  I am
becoming more and more convinced, as I look upon the system of
common-school training in the South, that the national government must
soon step in and aid popular education in some way.  To-day it has been
only by the most strenuous efforts on the part of the thinking men of
the South that the Negro's share of the school fund has not been cut
down to a pittance in some half-dozen States; and that movement not
only is not dead, but in many communities is gaining strength.  What in
the name of reason does this nation expect of a people, poorly trained
and hard pressed in severe economic competition, without political
rights, and with ludicrously inadequate common-school facilities?  What
can it expect but crime and listlessness, offset here and there by the
dogged struggles of the fortunate and more determined who are
themselves buoyed by the hope that in due time the country will come to
its senses?

I have thus far sought to make clear the physical, economic, and
political relations of the Negroes and whites in the South, as I have
conceived them, including, for the reasons set forth, crime and
education.  But after all that has been said on these more tangible
matters of human contact, there still remains a part essential to a
proper description of the South which it is difficult to describe or
fix in terms easily understood by strangers.  It is, in fine, the
atmosphere of the land, the thought and feeling, the thousand and one
little actions which go to make up life.  In any community or nation it
is these little things which are most elusive to the grasp and yet most
essential to any clear conception of the group life taken as a whole.
What is thus true of all communities is peculiarly true of the South,
where, outside of written history and outside of printed law, there has
been going on for a generation as deep a storm and stress of human
souls, as intense a ferment of feeling, as intricate a writhing of
spirit, as ever a people experienced.  Within and without the sombre
veil of color vast social forces have been at work,--efforts for human
betterment, movements toward disintegration and despair, tragedies and
comedies in social and economic life, and a swaying and lifting and
sinking of human hearts which have made this land a land of mingled
sorrow and joy, of change and excitement and unrest.

The centre of this spiritual turmoil has ever been the millions of
black freedmen and their sons, whose destiny is so fatefully bound up
with that of the nation.  And yet the casual observer visiting the
South sees at first little of this.  He notes the growing frequency of
dark faces as he rides along,--but otherwise the days slip lazily on,
the sun shines, and this little world seems as happy and contented as
other worlds he has visited.  Indeed, on the question of questions--the
Negro problem--he hears so little that there almost seems to be a
conspiracy of silence; the morning papers seldom mention it, and then
usually in a far-fetched academic way, and indeed almost every one
seems to forget and ignore the darker half of the land, until the
astonished visitor is inclined to ask if after all there IS any problem
here.  But if he lingers long enough there comes the awakening: perhaps
in a sudden whirl of passion which leaves him gasping at its bitter
intensity; more likely in a gradually dawning sense of things he had
not at first noticed.  Slowly but surely his eyes begin to catch the
shadows of the color-line: here he meets crowds of Negroes and whites;
then he is suddenly aware that he cannot discover a single dark face;
or again at the close of a day's wandering he may find himself in some
strange assembly, where all faces are tinged brown or black, and where
he has the vague, uncomfortable feeling of the stranger.  He realizes
at last that silently, resistlessly, the world about flows by him in
two great streams: they ripple on in the same sunshine, they approach
and mingle their waters in seeming carelessness,--then they divide and
flow wide apart.  It is done quietly; no mistakes are made, or if one
occurs, the swift arm of the law and of public opinion swings down for
a moment, as when the other day a black man and a white woman were
arrested for talking together on Whitehall Street in Atlanta.

Now if one notices carefully one will see that between these two
worlds, despite much physical contact and daily intermingling, there is
almost no community of intellectual life or point of transference where
the thoughts and feelings of one race can come into direct contact and
sympathy with the thoughts and feelings of the other.  Before and
directly after the war, when all the best of the Negroes were domestic
servants in the best of the white families, there were bonds of
intimacy, affection, and sometimes blood relationship, between the
races.  They lived in the same home, shared in the family life, often
attended the same church, and talked and conversed with each other.
But the increasing civilization of the Negro since then has naturally
meant the development of higher classes: there are increasing numbers
of ministers, teachers, physicians, merchants, mechanics, and
independent farmers, who by nature and training are the aristocracy and
leaders of the blacks.  Between them, however, and the best element of
the whites, there is little or no intellectual commerce.  They go to
separate churches, they live in separate sections, they are strictly
separated in all public gatherings, they travel separately, and they
are beginning to read different papers and books.  To most libraries,
lectures, concerts, and museums, Negroes are either not admitted at
all, or on terms peculiarly galling to the pride of the very classes
who might otherwise be attracted.  The daily paper chronicles the
doings of the black world from afar with no great regard for accuracy;
and so on, throughout the category of means for intellectual
communication,--schools, conferences, efforts for social betterment,
and the like,--it is usually true that the very representatives of the
two races, who for mutual benefit and the welfare of the land ought to
be in complete understanding and sympathy, are so far strangers that
one side thinks all whites are narrow and prejudiced, and the other
thinks educated Negroes dangerous and insolent.  Moreover, in a land
where the tyranny of public opinion and the intolerance of criticism is
for obvious historical reasons so strong as in the South, such a
situation is extremely difficult to correct.  The white man, as well as
the Negro, is bound and barred by the color-line, and many a scheme of
friendliness and philanthropy, of broad-minded sympathy and generous
fellowship between the two has dropped still-born because some busybody
has forced the color-question to the front and brought the tremendous
force of unwritten law against the innovators.

It is hardly necessary for me to add very much in regard to the social
contact between the races.  Nothing has come to replace that finer
sympathy and love between some masters and house servants which the
radical and more uncompromising drawing of the color-line in recent
years has caused almost completely to disappear.  In a world where it
means so much to take a man by the hand and sit beside him, to look
frankly into his eyes and feel his heart beating with red blood; in a
world where a social cigar or a cup of tea together means more than
legislative halls and magazine articles and speeches,--one can imagine
the consequences of the almost utter absence of such social amenities
between estranged races, whose separation extends even to parks and
streetcars.

Here there can be none of that social going down to the people,--the
opening of heart and hand of the best to the worst, in generous
acknowledgment of a common humanity and a common destiny.  On the other
hand, in matters of simple almsgiving, where there can be no question
of social contact, and in the succor of the aged and sick, the South,
as if stirred by a feeling of its unfortunate limitations, is generous
to a fault.  The black beggar is never turned away without a good deal
more than a crust, and a call for help for the unfortunate meets quick
response.  I remember, one cold winter, in Atlanta, when I refrained
from contributing to a public relief fund lest Negroes should be
discriminated against, I afterward inquired of a friend: "Were any
black people receiving aid?"  "Why," said he, "they were all black."

And yet this does not touch the kernel of the problem.  Human
advancement is not a mere question of almsgiving, but rather of
sympathy and cooperation among classes who would scorn charity.  And
here is a land where, in the higher walks of life, in all the higher
striving for the good and noble and true, the color-line comes to
separate natural friends and coworkers; while at the bottom of the
social group, in the saloon, the gambling-hell, and the brothel, that
same line wavers and disappears.

I have sought to paint an average picture of real relations between the
sons of master and man in the South.  I have not glossed over matters
for policy's sake, for I fear we have already gone too far in that sort
of thing.  On the other hand, I have sincerely sought to let no unfair
exaggerations creep in.  I do not doubt that in some Southern
communities conditions are better than those I have indicated; while I
am no less certain that in other communities they are far worse.

Nor does the paradox and danger of this situation fail to interest and
perplex the best conscience of the South.  Deeply religious and
intensely democratic as are the mass of the whites, they feel acutely
the false position in which the Negro problems place them.  Such an
essentially honest-hearted and generous people cannot cite the
caste-levelling precepts of Christianity, or believe in equality of
opportunity for all men, without coming to feel more and more with each
generation that the present drawing of the color-line is a flat
contradiction to their beliefs and professions.  But just as often as
they come to this point, the present social condition of the Negro
stands as a menace and a portent before even the most open-minded: if
there were nothing to charge against the Negro but his blackness or
other physical peculiarities, they argue, the problem would be
comparatively simple; but what can we say to his ignorance,
shiftlessness, poverty, and crime?  can a self-respecting group hold
anything but the least possible fellowship with such persons and
survive? and shall we let a mawkish sentiment sweep away the culture of
our fathers or the hope of our children?  The argument so put is of
great strength, but it is not a whit stronger than the argument of
thinking Negroes: granted, they reply, that the condition of our masses
is bad; there is certainly on the one hand adequate historical cause
for this, and unmistakable evidence that no small number have, in spite
of tremendous disadvantages, risen to the level of American
civilization.  And when, by proscription and prejudice, these same
Negroes are classed with and treated like the lowest of their people,
simply because they are Negroes, such a policy not only discourages
thrift and intelligence among black men, but puts a direct premium on
the very things you complain of,--inefficiency and crime.  Draw lines
of crime, of incompetency, of vice, as tightly and uncompromisingly as
you will, for these things must be proscribed; but a color-line not
only does not accomplish this purpose, but thwarts it.

In the face of two such arguments, the future of the South depends on
the ability of the representatives of these opposing views to see and
appreciate and sympathize with each other's position,--for the Negro to
realize more deeply than he does at present the need of uplifting the
masses of his people, for the white people to realize more vividly than
they have yet done the deadening and disastrous effect of a
color-prejudice that classes Phillis Wheatley and Sam Hose in the same
despised class.

It is not enough for the Negroes to declare that color-prejudice is the
sole cause of their social condition, nor for the white South to reply
that their social condition is the main cause of prejudice.  They both
act as reciprocal cause and effect, and a change in neither alone will
bring the desired effect.  Both must change, or neither can improve to
any great extent.  The Negro cannot stand the present reactionary
tendencies and unreasoning drawing of the color-line indefinitely
without discouragement and retrogression.  And the condition of the
Negro is ever the excuse for further discrimination.  Only by a union
of intelligence and sympathy across the color-line in this critical
period of the Republic shall justice and right triumph,

  "That mind and soul according well,
  May make one music as before,
            But vaster."




X

Of the Faith of the Fathers

  Dim face of Beauty haunting all the world,
    Fair face of Beauty all too fair to see,
  Where the lost stars adown the heavens are hurled,--

    There, there alone for thee

    May white peace be.

  Beauty, sad face of Beauty, Mystery, Wonder,
    What are these dreams to foolish babbling men
  Who cry with little noises 'neath the thunder

    Of Ages ground to sand,

    To a little sand.

  FIONA MACLEOD.


It was out in the country, far from home, far from my foster home, on a
dark Sunday night.  The road wandered from our rambling log-house up
the stony bed of a creek, past wheat and corn, until we could hear
dimly across the fields a rhythmic cadence of song,--soft, thrilling,
powerful, that swelled and died sorrowfully in our ears.  I was a
country schoolteacher then, fresh from the East, and had never seen a
Southern Negro revival.  To be sure, we in Berkshire were not perhaps
as stiff and formal as they in Suffolk of olden time; yet we were very
quiet and subdued, and I know not what would have happened those clear
Sabbath mornings had some one punctuated the sermon with a wild scream,
or interrupted the long prayer with a loud Amen!  And so most striking
to me, as I approached the village and the little plain church perched
aloft, was the air of intense excitement that possessed that mass of
black folk.  A sort of suppressed terror hung in the air and seemed to
seize us,--a pythian madness, a demoniac possession, that lent terrible
reality to song and word.  The black and massive form of the preacher
swayed and quivered as the words crowded to his lips and flew at us in
singular eloquence.  The people moaned and fluttered, and then the
gaunt-cheeked brown woman beside me suddenly leaped straight into the
air and shrieked like a lost soul, while round about came wail and
groan and outcry, and a scene of human passion such as I had never
conceived before.

Those who have not thus witnessed the frenzy of a Negro revival in the
untouched backwoods of the South can but dimly realize the religious
feeling of the slave; as described, such scenes appear grotesque and
funny, but as seen they are awful.  Three things characterized this
religion of the slave,--the Preacher, the Music, and the Frenzy.  The
Preacher is the most unique personality developed by the Negro on
American soil.  A leader, a politician, an orator, a "boss," an
intriguer, an idealist,--all these he is, and ever, too, the centre of
a group of men, now twenty, now a thousand in number.  The combination
of a certain adroitness with deep-seated earnestness, of tact with
consummate ability, gave him his preeminence, and helps him maintain
it.  The type, of course, varies according to time and place, from the
West Indies in the sixteenth century to New England in the nineteenth,
and from the Mississippi bottoms to cities like New Orleans or New York.

The Music of Negro religion is that plaintive rhythmic melody, with its
touching minor cadences, which, despite caricature and defilement,
still remains the most original and beautiful expression of human life
and longing yet born on American soil.  Sprung from the African
forests, where its counterpart can still be heard, it was adapted,
changed, and intensified by the tragic soul-life of the slave, until,
under the stress of law and whip, it became the one true expression of
a people's sorrow, despair, and hope.

Finally the Frenzy of "Shouting," when the Spirit of the Lord passed
by, and, seizing the devotee, made him mad with supernatural joy, was
the last essential of Negro religion and the one more devoutly believed
in than all the rest.  It varied in expression from the silent rapt
countenance or the low murmur and moan to the mad abandon of physical
fervor,--the stamping, shrieking, and shouting, the rushing to and fro
and wild waving of arms, the weeping and laughing, the vision and the
trance.  All this is nothing new in the world, but old as religion, as
Delphi and Endor.  And so firm a hold did it have on the Negro, that
many generations firmly believed that without this visible
manifestation of the God there could be no true communion with the
Invisible.

These were the characteristics of Negro religious life as developed up
to the time of Emancipation.  Since under the peculiar circumstances of
the black man's environment they were the one expression of his higher
life, they are of deep interest to the student of his development, both
socially and psychologically.  Numerous are the attractive lines of
inquiry that here group themselves.  What did slavery mean to the
African savage?  What was his attitude toward the World and Life?  What
seemed to him good and evil,--God and Devil?  Whither went his longings
and strivings, and wherefore were his heart-burnings and
disappointments?  Answers to such questions can come only from a study
of Negro religion as a development, through its gradual changes from
the heathenism of the Gold Coast to the institutional Negro church of
Chicago.

Moreover, the religious growth of millions of men, even though they be
slaves, cannot be without potent influence upon their contemporaries.
The Methodists and Baptists of America owe much of their condition to
the silent but potent influence of their millions of Negro converts.
Especially is this noticeable in the South, where theology and
religious philosophy are on this account a long way behind the North,
and where the religion of the poor whites is a plain copy of Negro
thought and methods.  The mass of "gospel" hymns which has swept
through American churches and well-nigh ruined our sense of song
consists largely of debased imitations of Negro melodies made by ears
that caught the jingle but not the music, the body but not the soul, of
the Jubilee songs.  It is thus clear that the study of Negro religion
is not only a vital part of the history of the Negro in America, but no
uninteresting part of American history.

The Negro church of to-day is the social centre of Negro life in the
United States, and the most characteristic expression of African
character.  Take a typical church in a small Virginia town: it is the
"First Baptist"--a roomy brick edifice seating five hundred or more
persons, tastefully finished in Georgia pine, with a carpet, a small
organ, and stained-glass windows.  Underneath is a large assembly room
with benches.  This building is the central club-house of a community
of a thousand or more Negroes.  Various organizations meet here,--the
church proper, the Sunday-school, two or three insurance societies,
women's societies, secret societies, and mass meetings of various
kinds.  Entertainments, suppers, and lectures are held beside the five
or six regular weekly religious services.  Considerable sums of money
are collected and expended here, employment is found for the idle,
strangers are introduced, news is disseminated and charity distributed.
At the same time this social, intellectual, and economic centre is a
religious centre of great power.  Depravity, Sin, Redemption, Heaven,
Hell, and Damnation are preached twice a Sunday after the crops are
laid by; and few indeed of the community have the hardihood to
withstand conversion.  Back of this more formal religion, the Church
often stands as a real conserver of morals, a strengthener of family
life, and the final authority on what is Good and Right.

Thus one can see in the Negro church to-day, reproduced in microcosm,
all the great world from which the Negro is cut off by color-prejudice
and social condition.  In the great city churches the same tendency is
noticeable and in many respects emphasized.  A great church like the
Bethel of Philadelphia has over eleven hundred members, an edifice
seating fifteen hundred persons and valued at one hundred thousand
dollars, an annual budget of five thousand dollars, and a government
consisting of a pastor with several assisting local preachers, an
executive and legislative board, financial boards and tax collectors;
general church meetings for making laws; sub-divided groups led by
class leaders, a company of militia, and twenty-four auxiliary
societies.  The activity of a church like this is immense and
far-reaching, and the bishops who preside over these organizations
throughout the land are among the most powerful Negro rulers in the
world.

Such churches are really governments of men, and consequently a little
investigation reveals the curious fact that, in the South, at least,
practically every American Negro is a church member.  Some, to be sure,
are not regularly enrolled, and a few do not habitually attend
services; but, practically, a proscribed people must have a social
centre, and that centre for this people is the Negro church.  The
census of 1890 showed nearly twenty-four thousand Negro churches in the
country, with a total enrolled membership of over two and a half
millions, or ten actual church members to every twenty-eight persons,
and in some Southern States one in every two persons.  Besides these
there is the large number who, while not enrolled as members, attend
and take part in many of the activities of the church.  There is an
organized Negro church for every sixty black families in the nation,
and in some States for every forty families, owning, on an average, a
thousand dollars' worth of property each, or nearly twenty-six million
dollars in all.

Such, then, is the large development of the Negro church since
Emancipation.  The question now is, What have been the successive steps
of this social history and what are the present tendencies?  First, we
must realize that no such institution as the Negro church could rear
itself without definite historical foundations.  These foundations we
can find if we remember that the social history of the Negro did not
start in America.  He was brought from a definite social
environment,--the polygamous clan life under the headship of the chief
and the potent influence of the priest.  His religion was
nature-worship, with profound belief in invisible surrounding
influences, good and bad, and his worship was through incantation and
sacrifice.  The first rude change in this life was the slave ship and
the West Indian sugar-fields.  The plantation organization replaced the
clan and tribe, and the white master replaced the chief with far
greater and more despotic powers.  Forced and long-continued toil
became the rule of life, the old ties of blood relationship and kinship
disappeared, and instead of the family appeared a new polygamy and
polyandry, which, in some cases, almost reached promiscuity.  It was a
terrific social revolution, and yet some traces were retained of the
former group life, and the chief remaining institution was the Priest
or Medicine-man.  He early appeared on the plantation and found his
function as the healer of the sick, the interpreter of the Unknown, the
comforter of the sorrowing, the supernatural avenger of wrong, and the
one who rudely but picturesquely expressed the longing, disappointment,
and resentment of a stolen and oppressed people.  Thus, as bard,
physician, judge, and priest, within the narrow limits allowed by the
slave system, rose the Negro preacher, and under him the first church
was not at first by any means Christian nor definitely organized;
rather it was an adaptation and mingling of heathen rites among the
members of each plantation, and roughly designated as Voodooism.
Association with the masters, missionary effort and motives of
expediency gave these rites an early veneer of Christianity, and after
the lapse of many generations the Negro church became Christian.

Two characteristic things must be noticed in regard to the church.
First, it became almost entirely Baptist and Methodist in faith;
secondly, as a social institution it antedated by many decades the
monogamic Negro home.  From the very circumstances of its beginning,
the church was confined to the plantation, and consisted primarily of a
series of disconnected units; although, later on, some freedom of
movement was allowed, still this geographical limitation was always
important and was one cause of the spread of the decentralized and
democratic Baptist faith among the slaves.  At the same time, the
visible rite of baptism appealed strongly to their mystic temperament.
To-day the Baptist Church is still largest in membership among Negroes,
and has a million and a half communicants.  Next in popularity came the
churches organized in connection with the white neighboring churches,
chiefly Baptist and Methodist, with a few Episcopalian and others.  The
Methodists still form the second greatest denomination, with nearly a
million members.  The faith of these two leading denominations was more
suited to the slave church from the prominence they gave to religious
feeling and fervor.  The Negro membership in other denominations has
always been small and relatively unimportant, although the
Episcopalians and Presbyterians are gaining among the more intelligent
classes to-day, and the Catholic Church is making headway in certain
sections.  After Emancipation, and still earlier in the North, the
Negro churches largely severed such affiliations as they had had with
the white churches, either by choice or by compulsion.  The Baptist
churches became independent, but the Methodists were compelled early to
unite for purposes of episcopal government.  This gave rise to the
great African Methodist Church, the greatest Negro organization in the
world, to the Zion Church and the Colored Methodist, and to the black
conferences and churches in this and other denominations.

The second fact noted, namely, that the Negro church antedates the
Negro home, leads to an explanation of much that is paradoxical in this
communistic institution and in the morals of its members.  But
especially it leads us to regard this institution as peculiarly the
expression of the inner ethical life of a people in a sense seldom true
elsewhere.  Let us turn, then, from the outer physical development of
the church to the more important inner ethical life of the people who
compose it.  The Negro has already been pointed out many times as a
religious animal,--a being of that deep emotional nature which turns
instinctively toward the supernatural.  Endowed with a rich tropical
imagination and a keen, delicate appreciation of Nature, the
transplanted African lived in a world animate with gods and devils,
elves and witches; full of strange influences,--of Good to be implored,
of Evil to be propitiated.  Slavery, then, was to him the dark triumph
of Evil over him.  All the hateful powers of the Under-world were
striving against him, and a spirit of revolt and revenge filled his
heart.  He called up all the resources of heathenism to aid,--exorcism
and witch-craft, the mysterious Obi worship with its barbarious rites,
spells, and blood-sacrifice even, now and then, of human victims.
Weird midnight orgies and mystic conjurations were invoked, the
witch-woman and the voodoo-priest became the centre of Negro group
life, and that vein of vague superstition which characterizes the
unlettered Negro even to-day was deepened and strengthened.

In spite, however, of such success as that of the fierce Maroons, the
Danish blacks, and others, the spirit of revolt gradually died away
under the untiring energy and superior strength of the slave masters.
By the middle of the eighteenth century the black slave had sunk, with
hushed murmurs, to his place at the bottom of a new economic system,
and was unconsciously ripe for a new philosophy of life.  Nothing
suited his condition then better than the doctrines of passive
submission embodied in the newly learned Christianity.  Slave masters
early realized this, and cheerfully aided religious propaganda within
certain bounds.  The long system of repression and degradation of the
Negro tended to emphasize the elements of his character which made him
a valuable chattel: courtesy became humility, moral strength
degenerated into submission, and the exquisite native appreciation of
the beautiful became an infinite capacity for dumb suffering.  The
Negro, losing the joy of this world, eagerly seized upon the offered
conceptions of the next; the avenging Spirit of the Lord enjoining
patience in this world, under sorrow and tribulation until the Great
Day when He should lead His dark children home,--this became his
comforting dream.  His preacher repeated the prophecy, and his bards
sang,--

  "Children, we all shall be free
  When the Lord shall appear!"


This deep religious fatalism, painted so beautifully in "Uncle Tom,"
came soon to breed, as all fatalistic faiths will, the sensualist side
by side with the martyr.  Under the lax moral life of the plantation,
where marriage was a farce, laziness a virtue, and property a theft, a
religion of resignation and submission degenerated easily, in less
strenuous minds, into a philosophy of indulgence and crime.  Many of
the worst characteristics of the Negro masses of to-day had their seed
in this period of the slave's ethical growth.  Here it was that the
Home was ruined under the very shadow of the Church, white and black;
here habits of shiftlessness took root, and sullen hopelessness
replaced hopeful strife.

With the beginning of the abolition movement and the gradual growth of
a class of free Negroes came a change.  We often neglect the influence
of the freedman before the war, because of the paucity of his numbers
and the small weight he had in the history of the nation.  But we must
not forget that his chief influence was internal,--was exerted on the
black world; and that there he was the ethical and social leader.
Huddled as he was in a few centres like Philadelphia, New York, and New
Orleans, the masses of the freedmen sank into poverty and listlessness;
but not all of them.  The free Negro leader early arose and his chief
characteristic was intense earnestness and deep feeling on the slavery
question.  Freedom became to him a real thing and not a dream.  His
religion became darker and more intense, and into his ethics crept a
note of revenge, into his songs a day of reckoning close at hand.  The
"Coming of the Lord" swept this side of Death, and came to be a thing
to be hoped for in this day.  Through fugitive slaves and irrepressible
discussion this desire for freedom seized the black millions still in
bondage, and became their one ideal of life.  The black bards caught
new notes, and sometimes even dared to sing,--

  "O Freedom, O Freedom, O Freedom over me!
  Before I'll be a slave
  I'll be buried in my grave,
  And go home to my Lord
  And be free."


For fifty years Negro religion thus transformed itself and identified
itself with the dream of Abolition, until that which was a radical fad
in the white North and an anarchistic plot in the white South had
become a religion to the black world.  Thus, when Emancipation finally
came, it seemed to the freedman a literal Coming of the Lord.  His
fervid imagination was stirred as never before, by the tramp of armies,
the blood and dust of battle, and the wail and whirl of social
upheaval.  He stood dumb and motionless before the whirlwind: what had
he to do with it?  Was it not the Lord's doing, and marvellous in his
eyes?  Joyed and bewildered with what came, he stood awaiting new
wonders till the inevitable Age of Reaction swept over the nation and
brought the crisis of to-day.

It is difficult to explain clearly the present critical stage of Negro
religion.  First, we must remember that living as the blacks do in
close contact with a great modern nation, and sharing, although
imperfectly, the soul-life of that nation, they must necessarily be
affected more or less directly by all the religious and ethical forces
that are to-day moving the United States.  These questions and
movements are, however, overshadowed and dwarfed by the (to them)
all-important question of their civil, political, and economic status.
They must perpetually discuss the "Negro Problem,"--must live, move,
and have their being in it, and interpret all else in its light or
darkness.  With this come, too, peculiar problems of their inner
life,--of the status of women, the maintenance of Home, the training of
children, the accumulation of wealth, and the prevention of crime.  All
this must mean a time of intense ethical ferment, of religious
heart-searching and intellectual unrest.  From the double life every
American Negro must live, as a Negro and as an American, as swept on by
the current of the nineteenth while yet struggling in the eddies of the
fifteenth century,--from this must arise a painful self-consciousness,
an almost morbid sense of personality and a moral hesitancy which is
fatal to self-confidence.  The worlds within and without the Veil of
Color are changing, and changing rapidly, but not at the same rate, not
in the same way; and this must produce a peculiar wrenching of the
soul, a peculiar sense of doubt and bewilderment.  Such a double life,
with double thoughts, double duties, and double social classes, must
give rise to double words and double ideals, and tempt the mind to
pretence or revolt, to hypocrisy or radicalism.

In some such doubtful words and phrases can one perhaps most clearly
picture the peculiar ethical paradox that faces the Negro of to-day and
is tingeing and changing his religious life.  Feeling that his rights
and his dearest ideals are being trampled upon, that the public
conscience is ever more deaf to his righteous appeal, and that all the
reactionary forces of prejudice, greed, and revenge are daily gaining
new strength and fresh allies, the Negro faces no enviable dilemma.
Conscious of his impotence, and pessimistic, he often becomes bitter
and vindictive; and his religion, instead of a worship, is a complaint
and a curse, a wail rather than a hope, a sneer rather than a faith.
On the other hand, another type of mind, shrewder and keener and more
tortuous too, sees in the very strength of the anti-Negro movement its
patent weaknesses, and with Jesuitic casuistry is deterred by no
ethical considerations in the endeavor to turn this weakness to the
black man's strength.  Thus we have two great and hardly reconcilable
streams of thought and ethical strivings; the danger of the one lies in
anarchy, that of the other in hypocrisy.  The one type of Negro stands
almost ready to curse God and die, and the other is too often found a
traitor to right and a coward before force; the one is wedded to ideals
remote, whimsical, perhaps impossible of realization; the other forgets
that life is more than meat and the body more than raiment.  But, after
all, is not this simply the writhing of the age translated into
black,--the triumph of the Lie which today, with its false culture,
faces the hideousness of the anarchist assassin?

To-day the two groups of Negroes, the one in the North, the other in
the South, represent these divergent ethical tendencies, the first
tending toward radicalism, the other toward hypocritical compromise.
It is no idle regret with which the white South mourns the loss of the
old-time Negro,--the frank, honest, simple old servant who stood for
the earlier religious age of submission and humility.  With all his
laziness and lack of many elements of true manhood, he was at least
open-hearted, faithful, and sincere.  To-day he is gone, but who is to
blame for his going?  Is it not those very persons who mourn for him?
Is it not the tendency, born of Reconstruction and Reaction, to found a
society on lawlessness and deception, to tamper with the moral fibre of
a naturally honest and straightforward people until the whites threaten
to become ungovernable tyrants and the blacks criminals and hypocrites?
Deception is the natural defence of the weak against the strong, and
the South used it for many years against its conquerors; to-day it must
be prepared to see its black proletariat turn that same two-edged
weapon against itself.  And how natural this is!  The death of Denmark
Vesey and Nat Turner proved long since to the Negro the present
hopelessness of physical defence.  Political defence is becoming less
and less available, and economic defence is still only partially
effective.  But there is a patent defence at hand,--the defence of
deception and flattery, of cajoling and lying.  It is the same defence
which peasants of the Middle Age used and which left its stamp on their
character for centuries.  To-day the young Negro of the South who would
succeed cannot be frank and outspoken, honest and self-assertive, but
rather he is daily tempted to be silent and wary, politic and sly; he
must flatter and be pleasant, endure petty insults with a smile, shut
his eyes to wrong; in too many cases he sees positive personal
advantage in deception and lying.  His real thoughts, his real
aspirations, must be guarded in whispers; he must not criticise, he
must not complain.  Patience, humility, and adroitness must, in these
growing black youth, replace impulse, manliness, and courage.  With
this sacrifice there is an economic opening, and perhaps peace and some
prosperity.  Without this there is riot, migration, or crime.  Nor is
this situation peculiar to the Southern United States, is it not rather
the only method by which undeveloped races have gained the right to
share modern culture?  The price of culture is a Lie.

On the other hand, in the North the tendency is to emphasize the
radicalism of the Negro.  Driven from his birthright in the South by a
situation at which every fibre of his more outspoken and assertive
nature revolts, he finds himself in a land where he can scarcely earn a
decent living amid the harsh competition and the color discrimination.
At the same time, through schools and periodicals, discussions and
lectures, he is intellectually quickened and awakened.  The soul, long
pent up and dwarfed, suddenly expands in new-found freedom.  What
wonder that every tendency is to excess,--radical complaint, radical
remedies, bitter denunciation or angry silence.  Some sink, some rise.
The criminal and the sensualist leave the church for the gambling-hell
and the brothel, and fill the slums of Chicago and Baltimore; the
better classes segregate themselves from the group-life of both white
and black, and form an aristocracy, cultured but pessimistic, whose
bitter criticism stings while it points out no way of escape.  They
despise the submission and subserviency of the Southern Negroes, but
offer no other means by which a poor and oppressed minority can exist
side by side with its masters.  Feeling deeply and keenly the
tendencies and opportunities of the age in which they live, their souls
are bitter at the fate which drops the Veil between; and the very fact
that this bitterness is natural and justifiable only serves to
intensify it and make it more maddening.

Between the two extreme types of ethical attitude which I have thus
sought to make clear wavers the mass of the millions of Negroes, North
and South; and their religious life and activity partake of this social
conflict within their ranks.  Their churches are differentiating,--now
into groups of cold, fashionable devotees, in no way distinguishable
from similar white groups save in color of skin; now into large social
and business institutions catering to the desire for information and
amusement of their members, warily avoiding unpleasant questions both
within and without the black world, and preaching in effect if not in
word: Dum vivimus, vivamus.

But back of this still broods silently the deep religious feeling of
the real Negro heart, the stirring, unguided might of powerful human
souls who have lost the guiding star of the past and seek in the great
night a new religious ideal.  Some day the Awakening will come, when
the pent-up vigor of ten million souls shall sweep irresistibly toward
the Goal, out of the Valley of the Shadow of Death, where all that
makes life worth living--Liberty, Justice, and Right--is marked "For
White People Only."




XI

Of the Passing of the First-Born

  O sister, sister, thy first-begotten,
  The hands that cling and the feet that follow,
  The voice of the child's blood crying yet,
  WHO HATH REMEMBERED ME?  WHO HATH FORGOTTEN?
  Thou hast forgotten, O summer swallow,
  But the world shall end when I forget.

  SWINBURNE.


"Unto you a child is born," sang the bit of yellow paper that fluttered
into my room one brown October morning.  Then the fear of fatherhood
mingled wildly with the joy of creation; I wondered how it looked and
how it felt--what were its eyes, and how its hair curled and crumpled
itself.  And I thought in awe of her,--she who had slept with Death to
tear a man-child from underneath her heart, while I was unconsciously
wandering.  I fled to my wife and child, repeating the while to myself
half wonderingly, "Wife and child?  Wife and child?"--fled fast and
faster than boat and steam-car, and yet must ever impatiently await
them; away from the hard-voiced city, away from the flickering sea into
my own Berkshire Hills that sit all sadly guarding the gates of
Massachusetts.

Up the stairs I ran to the wan mother and whimpering babe, to the
sanctuary on whose altar a life at my bidding had offered itself to win
a life, and won.  What is this tiny formless thing, this newborn wail
from an unknown world,--all head and voice?  I handle it curiously, and
watch perplexed its winking, breathing, and sneezing.  I did not love
it then; it seemed a ludicrous thing to love; but her I loved, my
girl-mother, she whom now I saw unfolding like the glory of the
morning--the transfigured woman.  Through her I came to love the wee
thing, as it grew strong; as its little soul unfolded itself in twitter
and cry and half-formed word, and as its eyes caught the gleam and
flash of life.  How beautiful he was, with his olive-tinted flesh and
dark gold ringlets, his eyes of mingled blue and brown, his perfect
little limbs, and the soft voluptuous roll which the blood of Africa
had moulded into his features!  I held him in my arms, after we had
sped far away from our Southern home,--held him, and glanced at the hot
red soil of Georgia and the breathless city of a hundred hills, and
felt a vague unrest.  Why was his hair tinted with gold?  An evil omen
was golden hair in my life.  Why had not the brown of his eyes crushed
out and killed the blue?--for brown were his father's eyes, and his
father's father's.  And thus in the Land of the Color-line I saw, as it
fell across my baby, the shadow of the Veil.

Within the Veil was he born, said I; and there within shall he live,--a
Negro and a Negro's son.  Holding in that little head--ah,
bitterly!--he unbowed pride of a hunted race, clinging with that tiny
dimpled hand--ah, wearily!--to a hope not hopeless but unhopeful, and
seeing with those bright wondering eyes that peer into my soul a land
whose freedom is to us a mockery and whose liberty a lie.  I saw the
shadow of the Veil as it passed over my baby, I saw the cold city
towering above the blood-red land.  I held my face beside his little
cheek, showed him the star-children and the twinkling lights as they
began to flash, and stilled with an even-song the unvoiced terror of my
life.

So sturdy and masterful he grew, so filled with bubbling life, so
tremulous with the unspoken wisdom of a life but eighteen months
distant from the All-life,--we were not far from worshipping this
revelation of the divine, my wife and I. Her own life builded and
moulded itself upon the child; he tinged her every dream and idealized
her every effort.  No hands but hers must touch and garnish those
little limbs; no dress or frill must touch them that had not wearied
her fingers; no voice but hers could coax him off to Dreamland, and she
and he together spoke some soft and unknown tongue and in it held
communion.  I too mused above his little white bed; saw the strength of
my own arm stretched onward through the ages through the newer strength
of his; saw the dream of my black fathers stagger a step onward in the
wild phantasm of the world; heard in his baby voice the voice of the
Prophet that was to rise within the Veil.

And so we dreamed and loved and planned by fall and winter, and the
full flush of the long Southern spring, till the hot winds rolled from
the fetid Gulf, till the roses shivered and the still stern sun
quivered its awful light over the hills of Atlanta.  And then one night
the little feet pattered wearily to the wee white bed, and the tiny
hands trembled; and a warm flushed face tossed on the pillow, and we
knew baby was sick.  Ten days he lay there,--a swift week and three
endless days, wasting, wasting away.  Cheerily the mother nursed him
the first days, and laughed into the little eyes that smiled again.
Tenderly then she hovered round him, till the smile fled away and Fear
crouched beside the little bed.

Then the day ended not, and night was a dreamless terror, and joy and
sleep slipped away.  I hear now that Voice at midnight calling me from
dull and dreamless trance,--crying, "The Shadow of Death!  The Shadow
of Death!"  Out into the starlight I crept, to rouse the gray
physician,--the Shadow of Death, the Shadow of Death.  The hours
trembled on; the night listened; the ghastly dawn glided like a tired
thing across the lamplight.  Then we two alone looked upon the child as
he turned toward us with great eyes, and stretched his stringlike
hands,--the Shadow of Death!  And we spoke no word, and turned away.

He died at eventide, when the sun lay like a brooding sorrow above the
western hills, veiling its face; when the winds spoke not, and the
trees, the great green trees he loved, stood motionless.  I saw his
breath beat quicker and quicker, pause, and then his little soul leapt
like a star that travels in the night and left a world of darkness in
its train.  The day changed not; the same tall trees peeped in at the
windows, the same green grass glinted in the setting sun.  Only in the
chamber of death writhed the world's most piteous thing--a childless
mother.

I shirk not.  I long for work.  I pant for a life full of striving.  I
am no coward, to shrink before the rugged rush of the storm, nor even
quail before the awful shadow of the Veil.  But hearken, O Death!  Is
not this my life hard enough,--is not that dull land that stretches its
sneering web about me cold enough,--is not all the world beyond these
four little walls pitiless enough, but that thou must needs enter
here,--thou, O Death?  About my head the thundering storm beat like a
heartless voice, and the crazy forest pulsed with the curses of the
weak; but what cared I, within my home beside my wife and baby boy?
Wast thou so jealous of one little coign of happiness that thou must
needs enter there,--thou, O Death?

A perfect life was his, all joy and love, with tears to make it
brighter,--sweet as a summer's day beside the Housatonic.  The world
loved him; the women kissed his curls, the men looked gravely into his
wonderful eyes, and the children hovered and fluttered about him.  I
can see him now, changing like the sky from sparkling laughter to
darkening frowns, and then to wondering thoughtfulness as he watched
the world.  He knew no color-line, poor dear--and the Veil, though it
shadowed him, had not yet darkened half his sun.  He loved the white
matron, he loved his black nurse; and in his little world walked souls
alone, uncolored and unclothed.  I--yea, all men--are larger and purer
by the infinite breadth of that one little life.  She who in simple
clearness of vision sees beyond the stars said when he had flown, "He
will be happy There; he ever loved beautiful things."  And I, far more
ignorant, and blind by the web of mine own weaving, sit alone winding
words and muttering, "If still he be, and he be There, and there be a
There, let him be happy, O Fate!"

Blithe was the morning of his burial, with bird and song and
sweet-smelling flowers.  The trees whispered to the grass, but the
children sat with hushed faces.  And yet it seemed a ghostly unreal
day,--the wraith of Life.  We seemed to rumble down an unknown street
behind a little white bundle of posies, with the shadow of a song in
our ears.  The busy city dinned about us; they did not say much, those
pale-faced hurrying men and women; they did not say much,--they only
glanced and said, "Niggers!"

We could not lay him in the ground there in Georgia, for the earth
there is strangely red; so we bore him away to the northward, with his
flowers and his little folded hands.  In vain, in vain!--for where, O
God!  beneath thy broad blue sky shall my dark baby rest in
peace,--where Reverence dwells, and Goodness, and a Freedom that is
free?

All that day and all that night there sat an awful gladness in my
heart,--nay, blame me not if I see the world thus darkly through the
Veil,--and my soul whispers ever to me saying, "Not dead, not dead, but
escaped; not bond, but free."  No bitter meanness now shall sicken his
baby heart till it die a living death, no taunt shall madden his happy
boyhood.  Fool that I was to think or wish that this little soul should
grow choked and deformed within the Veil!  I might have known that
yonder deep unworldly look that ever and anon floated past his eyes was
peering far beyond this narrow Now.  In the poise of his little
curl-crowned head did there not sit all that wild pride of being which
his father had hardly crushed in his own heart?  For what, forsooth,
shall a Negro want with pride amid the studied humiliations of fifty
million fellows?  Well sped, my boy, before the world had dubbed your
ambition insolence, had held your ideals unattainable, and taught you
to cringe and bow.  Better far this nameless void that stops my life
than a sea of sorrow for you.

Idle words; he might have borne his burden more bravely than we,--aye,
and found it lighter too, some day; for surely, surely this is not the
end.  Surely there shall yet dawn some mighty morning to lift the Veil
and set the prisoned free.  Not for me,--I shall die in my bonds,--but
for fresh young souls who have not known the night and waken to the
morning; a morning when men ask of the workman, not "Is he white?" but
"Can he work?"  When men ask artists, not "Are they black?" but "Do
they know?"  Some morning this may be, long, long years to come.  But
now there wails, on that dark shore within the Veil, the same deep
voice, THOU SHALT FOREGO!  And all have I foregone at that command, and
with small complaint,--all save that fair young form that lies so
coldly wed with death in the nest I had builded.

If one must have gone, why not I?  Why may I not rest me from this
restlessness and sleep from this wide waking?  Was not the world's
alembic, Time, in his young hands, and is not my time waning?  Are
there so many workers in the vineyard that the fair promise of this
little body could lightly be tossed away?  The wretched of my race that
line the alleys of the nation sit fatherless and unmothered; but Love
sat beside his cradle, and in his ear Wisdom waited to speak.  Perhaps
now he knows the All-love, and needs not to be wise.  Sleep, then,
child,--sleep till I sleep and waken to a baby voice and the ceaseless
patter of little feet--above the Veil.




XII

Of Alexander Crummell

  Then from the Dawn it seemed there came, but faint
  As from beyond the limit of the world,
  Like the last echo born of a great cry,
  Sounds, as if some fair city were one voice
  Around a king returning from his wars.

  TENNYSON.


This is the story of a human heart,--the tale of a black boy who many
long years ago began to struggle with life that he might know the world
and know himself.  Three temptations he met on those dark dunes that
lay gray and dismal before the wonder-eyes of the child: the temptation
of Hate, that stood out against the red dawn; the temptation of
Despair, that darkened noonday; and the temptation of Doubt, that ever
steals along with twilight.  Above all, you must hear of the vales he
crossed,--the Valley of Humiliation and the Valley of the Shadow of
Death.

I saw Alexander Crummell first at a Wilberforce commencement season,
amid its bustle and crush.  Tall, frail, and black he stood, with
simple dignity and an unmistakable air of good breeding.  I talked with
him apart, where the storming of the lusty young orators could not harm
us.  I spoke to him politely, then curiously, then eagerly, as I began
to feel the fineness of his character,--his calm courtesy, the
sweetness of his strength, and his fair blending of the hope and truth
of life.  Instinctively I bowed before this man, as one bows before the
prophets of the world.  Some seer he seemed, that came not from the
crimson Past or the gray To-come, but from the pulsing Now,--that
mocking world which seemed to me at once so light and dark, so splendid
and sordid.  Fourscore years had he wandered in this same world of
mine, within the Veil.

He was born with the Missouri Compromise and lay a-dying amid the
echoes of Manila and El Caney: stirring times for living, times dark to
look back upon, darker to look forward to. The black-faced lad that
paused over his mud and marbles seventy years ago saw puzzling vistas
as he looked down the world.  The slave-ship still groaned across the
Atlantic, faint cries burdened the Southern breeze, and the great black
father whispered mad tales of cruelty into those young ears.  From the
low doorway the mother silently watched her boy at play, and at
nightfall sought him eagerly lest the shadows bear him away to the land
of slaves.

So his young mind worked and winced and shaped curiously a vision of
Life; and in the midst of that vision ever stood one dark figure
alone,--ever with the hard, thick countenance of that bitter father,
and a form that fell in vast and shapeless folds.  Thus the temptation
of Hate grew and shadowed the growing child,--gliding stealthily into
his laughter, fading into his play, and seizing his dreams by day and
night with rough, rude turbulence.  So the black boy asked of sky and
sun and flower the never-answered Why? and loved, as he grew, neither
the world nor the world's rough ways.

Strange temptation for a child, you may think; and yet in this wide
land to-day a thousand thousand dark children brood before this same
temptation, and feel its cold and shuddering arms.  For them, perhaps,
some one will some day lift the Veil,--will come tenderly and cheerily
into those sad little lives and brush the brooding hate away, just as
Beriah Green strode in upon the life of Alexander Crummell.  And before
the bluff, kind-hearted man the shadow seemed less dark.  Beriah Green
had a school in Oneida County, New York, with a score of mischievous
boys.  "I'm going to bring a black boy here to educate," said Beriah
Green, as only a crank and an abolitionist would have dared to say.
"Oho!" laughed the boys.  "Ye-es," said his wife; and Alexander came.
Once before, the black boy had sought a school, had travelled, cold and
hungry, four hundred miles up into free New Hampshire, to Canaan.  But
the godly farmers hitched ninety yoke of oxen to the abolition
schoolhouse and dragged it into the middle of the swamp.  The black boy
trudged away.

The nineteenth was the first century of human sympathy,--the age when
half wonderingly we began to descry in others that transfigured spark
of divinity which we call Myself; when clodhoppers and peasants, and
tramps and thieves, and millionaires and--sometimes--Negroes, became
throbbing souls whose warm pulsing life touched us so nearly that we
half gasped with surprise, crying, "Thou too!  Hast Thou seen Sorrow
and the dull waters of Hopelessness?  Hast Thou known Life?"  And then
all helplessly we peered into those Other-worlds, and wailed, "O World
of Worlds, how shall man make you one?"

So in that little Oneida school there came to those schoolboys a
revelation of thought and longing beneath one black skin, of which they
had not dreamed before.  And to the lonely boy came a new dawn of
sympathy and inspiration.  The shadowy, formless thing--the temptation
of Hate, that hovered between him and the world--grew fainter and less
sinister.  It did not wholly fade away, but diffused itself and
lingered thick at the edges.  Through it the child now first saw the
blue and gold of life,--the sun-swept road that ran 'twixt heaven and
earth until in one far-off wan wavering line they met and kissed.  A
vision of life came to the growing boy,--mystic, wonderful.  He raised
his head, stretched himself, breathed deep of the fresh new air.
Yonder, behind the forests, he heard strange sounds; then glinting
through the trees he saw, far, far away, the bronzed hosts of a nation
calling,--calling faintly, calling loudly.  He heard the hateful clank
of their chains; he felt them cringe and grovel, and there rose within
him a protest and a prophecy.  And he girded himself to walk down the
world.

A voice and vision called him to be a priest,--a seer to lead the
uncalled out of the house of bondage.  He saw the headless host turn
toward him like the whirling of mad waters,--he stretched forth his
hands eagerly, and then, even as he stretched them, suddenly there
swept across the vision the temptation of Despair.

They were not wicked men,--the problem of life is not the problem of
the wicked,--they were calm, good men, Bishops of the Apostolic Church
of God, and strove toward righteousness.  They said slowly, "It is all
very natural--it is even commendable; but the General Theological
Seminary of the Episcopal Church cannot admit a Negro."  And when that
thin, half-grotesque figure still haunted their doors, they put their
hands kindly, half sorrowfully, on his shoulders, and said, "Now,--of
course, we--we know how YOU feel about it; but you see it is
impossible,--that is--well--it is premature.  Sometime, we
trust--sincerely trust--all such distinctions will fade away; but now
the world is as it is."

This was the temptation of Despair; and the young man fought it
doggedly.  Like some grave shadow he flitted by those halls, pleading,
arguing, half angrily demanding admittance, until there came the final
NO: until men hustled the disturber away, marked him as foolish,
unreasonable, and injudicious, a vain rebel against God's law.  And
then from that Vision Splendid all the glory faded slowly away, and
left an earth gray and stern rolling on beneath a dark despair.  Even
the kind hands that stretched themselves toward him from out the depths
of that dull morning seemed but parts of the purple shadows.  He saw
them coldly, and asked, "Why should I strive by special grace when the
way of the world is closed to me?"  All gently yet, the hands urged him
on,--the hands of young John Jay, that daring father's daring son; the
hands of the good folk of Boston, that free city.  And yet, with a way
to the priesthood of the Church open at last before him, the cloud
lingered there; and even when in old St. Paul's the venerable Bishop
raised his white arms above the Negro deacon--even then the burden had
not lifted from that heart, for there had passed a glory from the earth.

And yet the fire through which Alexander Crummell went did not burn in
vain.  Slowly and more soberly he took up again his plan of life.  More
critically he studied the situation.  Deep down below the slavery and
servitude of the Negro people he saw their fatal weaknesses, which long
years of mistreatment had emphasized.  The dearth of strong moral
character, of unbending righteousness, he felt, was their great
shortcoming, and here he would begin.  He would gather the best of his
people into some little Episcopal chapel and there lead, teach, and
inspire them, till the leaven spread, till the children grew, till the
world hearkened, till--till--and then across his dream gleamed some
faint after-glow of that first fair vision of youth--only an
after-glow, for there had passed a glory from the earth.

One day--it was in 1842, and the springtide was struggling merrily with
the May winds of New England--he stood at last in his own chapel in
Providence, a priest of the Church.  The days sped by, and the dark
young clergyman labored; he wrote his sermons carefully; he intoned his
prayers with a soft, earnest voice; he haunted the streets and accosted
the wayfarers; he visited the sick, and knelt beside the dying.  He
worked and toiled, week by week, day by day, month by month.  And yet
month by month the congregation dwindled, week by week the hollow walls
echoed more sharply, day by day the calls came fewer and fewer, and day
by day the third temptation sat clearer and still more clearly within
the Veil; a temptation, as it were, bland and smiling, with just a
shade of mockery in its smooth tones.  First it came casually, in the
cadence of a voice: "Oh, colored folks?  Yes."  Or perhaps more
definitely: "What do you EXPECT?"  In voice and gesture lay the
doubt--the temptation of Doubt.  How he hated it, and stormed at it
furiously!  "Of course they are capable," he cried; "of course they can
learn and strive and achieve--" and "Of course," added the temptation
softly, "they do nothing of the sort."  Of all the three temptations,
this one struck the deepest.  Hate?  He had outgrown so childish a
thing.  Despair?  He had steeled his right arm against it, and fought
it with the vigor of determination.  But to doubt the worth of his
life-work,--to doubt the destiny and capability of the race his soul
loved because it was his; to find listless squalor instead of eager
endeavor; to hear his own lips whispering, "They do not care; they
cannot know; they are dumb driven cattle,--why cast your pearls before
swine?"--this, this seemed more than man could bear; and he closed the
door, and sank upon the steps of the chancel, and cast his robe upon
the floor and writhed.

The evening sunbeams had set the dust to dancing in the gloomy chapel
when he arose.  He folded his vestments, put away the hymn-books, and
closed the great Bible.  He stepped out into the twilight, looked back
upon the narrow little pulpit with a weary smile, and locked the door.
Then he walked briskly to the Bishop, and told the Bishop what the
Bishop already knew.  "I have failed," he said simply.  And gaining
courage by the confession, he added: "What I need is a larger
constituency.  There are comparatively few Negroes here, and perhaps
they are not of the best.  I must go where the field is wider, and try
again."  So the Bishop sent him to Philadelphia, with a letter to
Bishop Onderdonk.

Bishop Onderdonk lived at the head of six white steps,--corpulent,
red-faced, and the author of several thrilling tracts on Apostolic
Succession.  It was after dinner, and the Bishop had settled himself
for a pleasant season of contemplation, when the bell must needs ring,
and there must burst in upon the Bishop a letter and a thin, ungainly
Negro.  Bishop Onderdonk read the letter hastily and frowned.
Fortunately, his mind was already clear on this point; and he cleared
his brow and looked at Crummell.  Then he said, slowly and
impressively: "I will receive you into this diocese on one condition:
no Negro priest can sit in my church convention, and no Negro church
must ask for representation there."

I sometimes fancy I can see that tableau: the frail black figure,
nervously twitching his hat before the massive abdomen of Bishop
Onderdonk; his threadbare coat thrown against the dark woodwork of the
bookcases, where Fox's "Lives of the Martyrs" nestled happily beside
"The Whole Duty of Man."  I seem to see the wide eyes of the Negro
wander past the Bishop's broadcloth to where the swinging glass doors
of the cabinet glow in the sunlight.  A little blue fly is trying to
cross the yawning keyhole.  He marches briskly up to it, peers into the
chasm in a surprised sort of way, and rubs his feelers reflectively;
then he essays its depths, and, finding it bottomless, draws back
again.  The dark-faced priest finds himself wondering if the fly too
has faced its Valley of Humiliation, and if it will plunge into
it,--when lo! it spreads its tiny wings and buzzes merrily across,
leaving the watcher wingless and alone.

Then the full weight of his burden fell upon him.  The rich walls
wheeled away, and before him lay the cold rough moor winding on through
life, cut in twain by one thick granite ridge,--here, the Valley of
Humiliation; yonder, the Valley of the Shadow of Death.  And I know not
which be darker,--no, not I. But this I know: in yonder Vale of the
Humble stand to-day a million swarthy men, who willingly would

  ". . . bear the whips and scorns of time,
  The oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
  The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,
  The insolence of office, and the spurns
  That patient merit of the unworthy takes,"--

all this and more would they bear did they but know that this were
sacrifice and not a meaner thing.  So surged the thought within that
lone black breast.  The Bishop cleared his throat suggestively; then,
recollecting that there was really nothing to say, considerately said
nothing, only sat tapping his foot impatiently.  But Alexander Crummell
said, slowly and heavily: "I will never enter your diocese on such
terms."  And saying this, he turned and passed into the Valley of the
Shadow of Death.  You might have noted only the physical dying, the
shattered frame and hacking cough; but in that soul lay deeper death
than that.  He found a chapel in New York,--the church of his father;
he labored for it in poverty and starvation, scorned by his fellow
priests.  Half in despair, he wandered across the sea, a beggar with
outstretched hands.  Englishmen clasped them,--Wilberforce and Stanley,
Thirwell and Ingles, and even Froude and Macaulay; Sir Benjamin Brodie
bade him rest awhile at Queen's College in Cambridge, and there he
lingered, struggling for health of body and mind, until he took his
degree in '53.  Restless still, and unsatisfied, he turned toward
Africa, and for long years, amid the spawn of the slave-smugglers,
sought a new heaven and a new earth.

So the man groped for light; all this was not Life,--it was the
world-wandering of a soul in search of itself, the striving of one who
vainly sought his place in the world, ever haunted by the shadow of a
death that is more than death,--the passing of a soul that has missed
its duty.  Twenty years he wandered,--twenty years and more; and yet
the hard rasping question kept gnawing within him, "What, in God's
name, am I on earth for?"  In the narrow New York parish his soul
seemed cramped and smothered.  In the fine old air of the English
University he heard the millions wailing over the sea.  In the wild
fever-cursed swamps of West Africa he stood helpless and alone.

You will not wonder at his weird pilgrimage,--you who in the swift
whirl of living, amid its cold paradox and marvellous vision, have
fronted life and asked its riddle face to face.  And if you find that
riddle hard to read, remember that yonder black boy finds it just a
little harder; if it is difficult for you to find and face your duty,
it is a shade more difficult for him; if your heart sickens in the
blood and dust of battle, remember that to him the dust is thicker and
the battle fiercer.  No wonder the wanderers fall!  No wonder we point
to thief and murderer, and haunting prostitute, and the never-ending
throng of unhearsed dead!  The Valley of the Shadow of Death gives few
of its pilgrims back to the world.

But Alexander Crummell it gave back.  Out of the temptation of Hate,
and burned by the fire of Despair, triumphant over Doubt, and steeled
by Sacrifice against Humiliation, he turned at last home across the
waters, humble and strong, gentle and determined.  He bent to all the
gibes and prejudices, to all hatred and discrimination, with that rare
courtesy which is the armor of pure souls.  He fought among his own,
the low, the grasping, and the wicked, with that unbending
righteousness which is the sword of the just.  He never faltered, he
seldom complained; he simply worked, inspiring the young, rebuking the
old, helping the weak, guiding the strong.

So he grew, and brought within his wide influence all that was best of
those who walk within the Veil.  They who live without knew not nor
dreamed of that full power within, that mighty inspiration which the
dull gauze of caste decreed that most men should not know.  And now
that he is gone, I sweep the Veil away and cry, Lo! the soul to whose
dear memory I bring this little tribute.  I can see his face still,
dark and heavy-lined beneath his snowy hair; lighting and shading, now
with inspiration for the future, now in innocent pain at some human
wickedness, now with sorrow at some hard memory from the past.  The
more I met Alexander Crummell, the more I felt how much that world was
losing which knew so little of him.  In another age he might have sat
among the elders of the land in purple-bordered toga; in another
country mothers might have sung him to the cradles.

He did his work,--he did it nobly and well; and yet I sorrow that here
he worked alone, with so little human sympathy.  His name to-day, in
this broad land, means little, and comes to fifty million ears laden
with no incense of memory or emulation.  And herein lies the tragedy of
the age: not that men are poor,--all men know something of poverty; not
that men are wicked,--who is good? not that men are ignorant,--what is
Truth?  Nay, but that men know so little of men.


He sat one morning gazing toward the sea.  He smiled and said, "The
gate is rusty on the hinges."  That night at starrise a wind came
moaning out of the west to blow the gate ajar, and then the soul I
loved fled like a flame across the Seas, and in its seat sat Death.

I wonder where he is to-day?  I wonder if in that dim world beyond, as
he came gliding in, there rose on some wan throne a King,--a dark and
pierced Jew, who knows the writhings of the earthly damned, saying, as
he laid those heart-wrung talents down, "Well done!" while round about
the morning stars sat singing.




XIII

Of the Coming of John

  What bring they 'neath the midnight,
    Beside the River-sea?
  They bring the human heart wherein
    No nightly calm can be;
  That droppeth never with the wind,
    Nor drieth with the dew;
  O calm it, God; thy calm is broad
    To cover spirits too.

   The river floweth on.

  MRS. BROWNING.


Carlisle Street runs westward from the centre of Johnstown, across a
great black bridge, down a hill and up again, by little shops and
meat-markets, past single-storied homes, until suddenly it stops
against a wide green lawn.  It is a broad, restful place, with two
large buildings outlined against the west.  When at evening the winds
come swelling from the east, and the great pall of the city's smoke
hangs wearily above the valley, then the red west glows like a
dreamland down Carlisle Street, and, at the tolling of the supper-bell,
throws the passing forms of students in dark silhouette against the
sky.  Tall and black, they move slowly by, and seem in the sinister
light to flit before the city like dim warning ghosts.  Perhaps they
are; for this is Wells Institute, and these black students have few
dealings with the white city below.

And if you will notice, night after night, there is one dark form that
ever hurries last and late toward the twinkling lights of Swain
Hall,--for Jones is never on time.  A long, straggling fellow he is,
brown and hard-haired, who seems to be growing straight out of his
clothes, and walks with a half-apologetic roll.  He used perpetually to
set the quiet dining-room into waves of merriment, as he stole to his
place after the bell had tapped for prayers; he seemed so perfectly
awkward.  And yet one glance at his face made one forgive him
much,--that broad, good-natured smile in which lay no bit of art or
artifice, but seemed just bubbling good-nature and genuine satisfaction
with the world.

He came to us from Altamaha, away down there beneath the gnarled oaks
of Southeastern Georgia, where the sea croons to the sands and the
sands listen till they sink half drowned beneath the waters, rising
only here and there in long, low islands.  The white folk of Altamaha
voted John a good boy,--fine plough-hand, good in the rice-fields,
handy everywhere, and always good-natured and respectful.  But they
shook their heads when his mother wanted to send him off to school.
"It'll spoil him,--ruin him," they said; and they talked as though they
knew.  But full half the black folk followed him proudly to the
station, and carried his queer little trunk and many bundles.  And
there they shook and shook hands, and the girls kissed him shyly and
the boys clapped him on the back.  So the train came, and he pinched
his little sister lovingly, and put his great arms about his mother's
neck, and then was away with a puff and a roar into the great yellow
world that flamed and flared about the doubtful pilgrim.  Up the coast
they hurried, past the squares and palmettos of Savannah, through the
cotton-fields and through the weary night, to Millville, and came with
the morning to the noise and bustle of Johnstown.

And they that stood behind, that morning in Altamaha, and watched the
train as it noisily bore playmate and brother and son away to the
world, had thereafter one ever-recurring word,--"When John comes." Then
what parties were to be, and what speakings in the churches; what new
furniture in the front room,--perhaps even a new front room; and there
would be a new schoolhouse, with John as teacher; and then perhaps a
big wedding; all this and more--when John comes.  But the white people
shook their heads.

At first he was coming at Christmas-time,--but the vacation proved too
short; and then, the next summer,--but times were hard and schooling
costly, and so, instead, he worked in Johnstown.  And so it drifted to
the next summer, and the next,--till playmates scattered, and mother
grew gray, and sister went up to the Judge's kitchen to work.  And
still the legend lingered,--"When John comes."

Up at the Judge's they rather liked this refrain; for they too had a
John--a fair-haired, smooth-faced boy, who had played many a long
summer's day to its close with his darker namesake.  "Yes, sir!  John
is at Princeton, sir," said the broad-shouldered gray-haired Judge
every morning as he marched down to the post-office.  "Showing the
Yankees what a Southern gentleman can do," he added; and strode home
again with his letters and papers.  Up at the great pillared house they
lingered long over the Princeton letter,--the Judge and his frail wife,
his sister and growing daughters.  "It'll make a man of him," said the
Judge, "college is the place."  And then he asked the shy little
waitress, "Well, Jennie, how's your John?" and added reflectively, "Too
bad, too bad your mother sent him off--it will spoil him."  And the
waitress wondered.

Thus in the far-away Southern village the world lay waiting, half
consciously, the coming of two young men, and dreamed in an
inarticulate way of new things that would be done and new thoughts that
all would think.  And yet it was singular that few thought of two
Johns,--for the black folk thought of one John, and he was black; and
the white folk thought of another John, and he was white.  And neither
world thought the other world's thought, save with a vague unrest.

Up in Johnstown, at the Institute, we were long puzzled at the case of
John Jones.  For a long time the clay seemed unfit for any sort of
moulding.  He was loud and boisterous, always laughing and singing, and
never able to work consecutively at anything.  He did not know how to
study; he had no idea of thoroughness; and with his tardiness,
carelessness, and appalling good-humor, we were sore perplexed.  One
night we sat in faculty-meeting, worried and serious; for Jones was in
trouble again.  This last escapade was too much, and so we solemnly
voted "that Jones, on account of repeated disorder and inattention to
work, be suspended for the rest of the term."

It seemed to us that the first time life ever struck Jones as a really
serious thing was when the Dean told him he must leave school.  He
stared at the gray-haired man blankly, with great eyes.  "Why,--why,"
he faltered, "but--I haven't graduated!"  Then the Dean slowly and
clearly explained, reminding him of the tardiness and the carelessness,
of the poor lessons and neglected work, of the noise and disorder,
until the fellow hung his head in confusion.  Then he said quickly,
"But you won't tell mammy and sister,--you won't write mammy, now will
you?  For if you won't I'll go out into the city and work, and come
back next term and show you something."  So the Dean promised
faithfully, and John shouldered his little trunk, giving neither word
nor look to the giggling boys, and walked down Carlisle Street to the
great city, with sober eyes and a set and serious face.

Perhaps we imagined it, but someway it seemed to us that the serious
look that crept over his boyish face that afternoon never left it
again.  When he came back to us he went to work with all his rugged
strength.  It was a hard struggle, for things did not come easily to
him,--few crowding memories of early life and teaching came to help him
on his new way; but all the world toward which he strove was of his own
building, and he builded slow and hard.  As the light dawned
lingeringly on his new creations, he sat rapt and silent before the
vision, or wandered alone over the green campus peering through and
beyond the world of men into a world of thought.  And the thoughts at
times puzzled him sorely; he could not see just why the circle was not
square, and carried it out fifty-six decimal places one
midnight,--would have gone further, indeed, had not the matron rapped
for lights out.  He caught terrible colds lying on his back in the
meadows of nights, trying to think out the solar system; he had grave
doubts as to the ethics of the Fall of Rome, and strongly suspected the
Germans of being thieves and rascals, despite his textbooks; he
pondered long over every new Greek word, and wondered why this meant
that and why it couldn't mean something else, and how it must have felt
to think all things in Greek.  So he thought and puzzled along for
himself,--pausing perplexed where others skipped merrily, and walking
steadily through the difficulties where the rest stopped and
surrendered.

Thus he grew in body and soul, and with him his clothes seemed to grow
and arrange themselves; coat sleeves got longer, cuffs appeared, and
collars got less soiled.  Now and then his boots shone, and a new
dignity crept into his walk.  And we who saw daily a new thoughtfulness
growing in his eyes began to expect something of this plodding boy.
Thus he passed out of the preparatory school into college, and we who
watched him felt four more years of change, which almost transformed
the tall, grave man who bowed to us commencement morning.  He had left
his queer thought-world and come back to a world of motion and of men.
He looked now for the first time sharply about him, and wondered he had
seen so little before.  He grew slowly to feel almost for the first
time the Veil that lay between him and the white world; he first
noticed now the oppression that had not seemed oppression before,
differences that erstwhile seemed natural, restraints and slights that
in his boyhood days had gone unnoticed or been greeted with a laugh.
He felt angry now when men did not call him "Mister," he clenched his
hands at the "Jim Crow" cars, and chafed at the color-line that hemmed
in him and his.  A tinge of sarcasm crept into his speech, and a vague
bitterness into his life; and he sat long hours wondering and planning
a way around these crooked things.  Daily he found himself shrinking
from the choked and narrow life of his native town.  And yet he always
planned to go back to Altamaha,--always planned to work there.  Still,
more and more as the day approached he hesitated with a nameless dread;
and even the day after graduation he seized with eagerness the offer of
the Dean to send him North with the quartette during the summer
vacation, to sing for the Institute.  A breath of air before the
plunge, he said to himself in half apology.

It was a bright September afternoon, and the streets of New York were
brilliant with moving men.  They reminded John of the sea, as he sat in
the square and watched them, so changelessly changing, so bright and
dark, so grave and gay.  He scanned their rich and faultless clothes,
the way they carried their hands, the shape of their hats; he peered
into the hurrying carriages.  Then, leaning back with a sigh, he said,
"This is the World."  The notion suddenly seized him to see where the
world was going; since many of the richer and brighter seemed hurrying
all one way.  So when a tall, light-haired young man and a little
talkative lady came by, he rose half hesitatingly and followed them.
Up the street they went, past stores and gay shops, across a broad
square, until with a hundred others they entered the high portal of a
great building.

He was pushed toward the ticket-office with the others, and felt in his
pocket for the new five-dollar bill he had hoarded.  There seemed
really no time for hesitation, so he drew it bravely out, passed it to
the busy clerk, and received simply a ticket but no change.  When at
last he realized that he had paid five dollars to enter he knew not
what, he stood stockstill amazed.  "Be careful," said a low voice
behind him; "you must not lynch the colored gentleman simply because
he's in your way," and a girl looked up roguishly into the eyes of her
fair-haired escort.  A shade of annoyance passed over the escort's
face.  "You WILL not understand us at the South," he said half
impatiently, as if continuing an argument.  "With all your professions,
one never sees in the North so cordial and intimate relations between
white and black as are everyday occurrences with us.  Why, I remember
my closest playfellow in boyhood was a little Negro named after me, and
surely no two,--WELL!" The man stopped short and flushed to the roots
of his hair, for there directly beside his reserved orchestra chairs
sat the Negro he had stumbled over in the hallway.  He hesitated and
grew pale with anger, called the usher and gave him his card, with a
few peremptory words, and slowly sat down.  The lady deftly changed the
subject.

All this John did not see, for he sat in a half-daze minding the scene
about him; the delicate beauty of the hall, the faint perfume, the
moving myriad of men, the rich clothing and low hum of talking seemed
all a part of a world so different from his, so strangely more
beautiful than anything he had known, that he sat in dreamland, and
started when, after a hush, rose high and clear the music of
Lohengrin's swan.  The infinite beauty of the wail lingered and swept
through every muscle of his frame, and put it all a-tune.  He closed
his eyes and grasped the elbows of the chair, touching unwittingly the
lady's arm.  And the lady drew away.  A deep longing swelled in all his
heart to rise with that clear music out of the dirt and dust of that
low life that held him prisoned and befouled.  If he could only live up
in the free air where birds sang and setting suns had no touch of
blood!  Who had called him to be the slave and butt of all?  And if he
had called, what right had he to call when a world like this lay open
before men?

Then the movement changed, and fuller, mightier harmony swelled away.
He looked thoughtfully across the hall, and wondered why the beautiful
gray-haired woman looked so listless, and what the little man could be
whispering about.  He would not like to be listless and idle, he
thought, for he felt with the music the movement of power within him.
If he but had some master-work, some life-service, hard,--aye, bitter
hard, but without the cringing and sickening servility, without the
cruel hurt that hardened his heart and soul.  When at last a soft
sorrow crept across the violins, there came to him the vision of a
far-off home, the great eyes of his sister, and the dark drawn face of
his mother.  And his heart sank below the waters, even as the sea-sand
sinks by the shores of Altamaha, only to be lifted aloft again with
that last ethereal wail of the swan that quivered and faded away into
the sky.

It left John sitting so silent and rapt that he did not for some time
notice the usher tapping him lightly on the shoulder and saying
politely, "Will you step this way, please, sir?"  A little surprised,
he arose quickly at the last tap, and, turning to leave his seat,
looked full into the face of the fair-haired young man.  For the first
time the young man recognized his dark boyhood playmate, and John knew
that it was the Judge's son.  The White John started, lifted his hand,
and then froze into his chair; the black John smiled lightly, then
grimly, and followed the usher down the aisle.  The manager was sorry,
very, very sorry,--but he explained that some mistake had been made in
selling the gentleman a seat already disposed of; he would refund the
money, of course,--and indeed felt the matter keenly, and so forth,
and--before he had finished John was gone, walking hurriedly across the
square and down the broad streets, and as he passed the park he
buttoned his coat and said, "John Jones, you're a natural-born fool."
Then he went to his lodgings and wrote a letter, and tore it up; he
wrote another, and threw it in the fire.  Then he seized a scrap of
paper and wrote: "Dear Mother and Sister--I am coming--John."

"Perhaps," said John, as he settled himself on the train, "perhaps I am
to blame myself in struggling against my manifest destiny simply
because it looks hard and unpleasant.  Here is my duty to Altamaha
plain before me; perhaps they'll let me help settle the Negro problems
there,--perhaps they won't.  'I will go in to the King, which is not
according to the law; and if I perish, I perish.'" And then he mused
and dreamed, and planned a life-work; and the train flew south.

Down in Altamaha, after seven long years, all the world knew John was
coming.  The homes were scrubbed and scoured,--above all, one; the
gardens and yards had an unwonted trimness, and Jennie bought a new
gingham.  With some finesse and negotiation, all the dark Methodists
and Presbyterians were induced to join in a monster welcome at the
Baptist Church; and as the day drew near, warm discussions arose on
every corner as to the exact extent and nature of John's
accomplishments.  It was noontide on a gray and cloudy day when he
came.  The black town flocked to the depot, with a little of the white
at the edges,--a happy throng, with "Good-mawnings" and "Howdys" and
laughing and joking and jostling.  Mother sat yonder in the window
watching; but sister Jennie stood on the platform, nervously fingering
her dress, tall and lithe, with soft brown skin and loving eyes peering
from out a tangled wilderness of hair.  John rose gloomily as the train
stopped, for he was thinking of the "Jim Crow" car; he stepped to the
platform, and paused: a little dingy station, a black crowd gaudy and
dirty, a half-mile of dilapidated shanties along a straggling ditch of
mud.  An overwhelming sense of the sordidness and narrowness of it all
seized him; he looked in vain for his mother, kissed coldly the tall,
strange girl who called him brother, spoke a short, dry word here and
there; then, lingering neither for handshaking nor gossip, started
silently up the street, raising his hat merely to the last eager old
aunty, to her open-mouthed astonishment.  The people were distinctly
bewildered.  This silent, cold man,--was this John?  Where was his
smile and hearty hand-grasp?  "'Peared kind o' down in the mouf," said
the Methodist preacher thoughtfully.  "Seemed monstus stuck up,"
complained a Baptist sister.  But the white postmaster from the edge of
the crowd expressed the opinion of his folks plainly.  "That damn
Nigger," said he, as he shouldered the mail and arranged his tobacco,
"has gone North and got plum full o' fool notions; but they won't work
in Altamaha."  And the crowd melted away.

The meeting of welcome at the Baptist Church was a failure.  Rain
spoiled the barbecue, and thunder turned the milk in the ice-cream.
When the speaking came at night, the house was crowded to overflowing.
The three preachers had especially prepared themselves, but somehow
John's manner seemed to throw a blanket over everything,--he seemed so
cold and preoccupied, and had so strange an air of restraint that the
Methodist brother could not warm up to his theme and elicited not a
single "Amen"; the Presbyterian prayer was but feebly responded to, and
even the Baptist preacher, though he wakened faint enthusiasm, got so
mixed up in his favorite sentence that he had to close it by stopping
fully fifteen minutes sooner than he meant.  The people moved uneasily
in their seats as John rose to reply.  He spoke slowly and
methodically.  The age, he said, demanded new ideas; we were far
different from those men of the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries,--with broader ideas of human brotherhood and destiny.  Then
he spoke of the rise of charity and popular education, and particularly
of the spread of wealth and work.  The question was, then, he added
reflectively, looking at the low discolored ceiling, what part the
Negroes of this land would take in the striving of the new century.  He
sketched in vague outline the new Industrial School that might rise
among these pines, he spoke in detail of the charitable and
philanthropic work that might be organized, of money that might be
saved for banks and business.  Finally he urged unity, and deprecated
especially religious and denominational bickering.  "To-day," he said,
with a smile, "the world cares little whether a man be Baptist or
Methodist, or indeed a churchman at all, so long as he is good and
true.  What difference does it make whether a man be baptized in river
or washbowl, or not at all?  Let's leave all that littleness, and look
higher."  Then, thinking of nothing else, he slowly sat down.  A
painful hush seized that crowded mass.  Little had they understood of
what he said, for he spoke an unknown tongue, save the last word about
baptism; that they knew, and they sat very still while the clock
ticked.  Then at last a low suppressed snarl came from the Amen corner,
and an old bent man arose, walked over the seats, and climbed straight
up into the pulpit.  He was wrinkled and black, with scant gray and
tufted hair; his voice and hands shook as with palsy; but on his face
lay the intense rapt look of the religious fanatic.  He seized the
Bible with his rough, huge hands; twice he raised it inarticulate, and
then fairly burst into words, with rude and awful eloquence.  He
quivered, swayed, and bent; then rose aloft in perfect majesty, till
the people moaned and wept, wailed and shouted, and a wild shrieking
arose from the corners where all the pent-up feeling of the hour
gathered itself and rushed into the air.  John never knew clearly what
the old man said; he only felt himself held up to scorn and scathing
denunciation for trampling on the true Religion, and he realized with
amazement that all unknowingly he had put rough, rude hands on
something this little world held sacred.  He arose silently, and passed
out into the night.  Down toward the sea he went, in the fitful
starlight, half conscious of the girl who followed timidly after him.
When at last he stood upon the bluff, he turned to his little sister
and looked upon her sorrowfully, remembering with sudden pain how
little thought he had given her.  He put his arm about her and let her
passion of tears spend itself on his shoulder.

Long they stood together, peering over the gray unresting water.

"John," she said, "does it make every one--unhappy when they study and
learn lots of things?"

He paused and smiled.  "I am afraid it does," he said.

"And, John, are you glad you studied?"

"Yes," came the answer, slowly but positively.

She watched the flickering lights upon the sea, and said thoughtfully,
"I wish I was unhappy,--and--and," putting both arms about his neck, "I
think I am, a little, John."

It was several days later that John walked up to the Judge's house to
ask for the privilege of teaching the Negro school.  The Judge himself
met him at the front door, stared a little hard at him, and said
brusquely, "Go 'round to the kitchen door, John, and wait."  Sitting on
the kitchen steps, John stared at the corn, thoroughly perplexed.  What
on earth had come over him?  Every step he made offended some one.  He
had come to save his people, and before he left the depot he had hurt
them.  He sought to teach them at the church, and had outraged their
deepest feelings.  He had schooled himself to be respectful to the
Judge, and then blundered into his front door.  And all the time he had
meant right,--and yet, and yet, somehow he found it so hard and strange
to fit his old surroundings again, to find his place in the world about
him.  He could not remember that he used to have any difficulty in the
past, when life was glad and gay.  The world seemed smooth and easy
then.  Perhaps,--but his sister came to the kitchen door just then and
said the Judge awaited him.

The Judge sat in the dining-room amid his morning's mail, and he did
not ask John to sit down.  He plunged squarely into the business.
"You've come for the school, I suppose.  Well John, I want to speak to
you plainly.  You know I'm a friend to your people.  I've helped you
and your family, and would have done more if you hadn't got the notion
of going off.  Now I like the colored people, and sympathize with all
their reasonable aspirations; but you and I both know, John, that in
this country the Negro must remain subordinate, and can never expect to
be the equal of white men.  In their place, your people can be honest
and respectful; and God knows, I'll do what I can to help them.  But
when they want to reverse nature, and rule white men, and marry white
women, and sit in my parlor, then, by God! we'll hold them under if we
have to lynch every Nigger in the land.  Now, John, the question is,
are you, with your education and Northern notions, going to accept the
situation and teach the darkies to be faithful servants and laborers as
your fathers were,--I knew your father, John, he belonged to my
brother, and he was a good Nigger.  Well--well, are you going to be
like him, or are you going to try to put fool ideas of rising and
equality into these folks' heads, and make them discontented and
unhappy?"

"I am going to accept the situation, Judge Henderson," answered John,
with a brevity that did not escape the keen old man.  He hesitated a
moment, and then said shortly, "Very well,--we'll try you awhile.
Good-morning."

It was a full month after the opening of the Negro school that the
other John came home, tall, gay, and headstrong.  The mother wept, the
sisters sang.  The whole white town was glad.  A proud man was the
Judge, and it was a goodly sight to see the two swinging down Main
Street together.  And yet all did not go smoothly between them, for the
younger man could not and did not veil his contempt for the little
town, and plainly had his heart set on New York.  Now the one cherished
ambition of the Judge was to see his son mayor of Altamaha,
representative to the legislature, and--who could say?--governor of
Georgia.  So the argument often waxed hot between them.  "Good heavens,
father," the younger man would say after dinner, as he lighted a cigar
and stood by the fireplace, "you surely don't expect a young fellow
like me to settle down permanently in this--this God-forgotten town
with nothing but mud and Negroes?"  "I did," the Judge would answer
laconically; and on this particular day it seemed from the gathering
scowl that he was about to add something more emphatic, but neighbors
had already begun to drop in to admire his son, and the conversation
drifted.

"Heah that John is livenin' things up at the darky school," volunteered
the postmaster, after a pause.

"What now?" asked the Judge, sharply.

"Oh, nothin' in particulah,--just his almighty air and uppish ways.
B'lieve I did heah somethin' about his givin' talks on the French
Revolution, equality, and such like.  He's what I call a dangerous
Nigger."

"Have you heard him say anything out of the way?"

"Why, no,--but Sally, our girl, told my wife a lot of rot.  Then, too,
I don't need to heah: a Nigger what won't say 'sir' to a white man,
or--"

"Who is this John?" interrupted the son.

"Why, it's little black John, Peggy's son,--your old playfellow."

The young man's face flushed angrily, and then he laughed.

"Oh," said he, "it's the darky that tried to force himself into a seat
beside the lady I was escorting--"

But Judge Henderson waited to hear no more.  He had been nettled all
day, and now at this he rose with a half-smothered oath, took his hat
and cane, and walked straight to the schoolhouse.

For John, it had been a long, hard pull to get things started in the
rickety old shanty that sheltered his school.  The Negroes were rent
into factions for and against him, the parents were careless, the
children irregular and dirty, and books, pencils, and slates largely
missing.  Nevertheless, he struggled hopefully on, and seemed to see at
last some glimmering of dawn.  The attendance was larger and the
children were a shade cleaner this week.  Even the booby class in
reading showed a little comforting progress.  So John settled himself
with renewed patience this afternoon.

"Now, Mandy," he said cheerfully, "that's better; but you mustn't chop
your words up so: 'If--the-man--goes.' Why, your little brother even
wouldn't tell a story that way, now would he?"

"Naw, suh, he cain't talk."

"All right; now let's try again: 'If the man--'

"John!"

The whole school started in surprise, and the teacher half arose, as
the red, angry face of the Judge appeared in the open doorway.

"John, this school is closed.  You children can go home and get to
work.  The white people of Altamaha are not spending their money on
black folks to have their heads crammed with impudence and lies.  Clear
out!  I'll lock the door myself."

Up at the great pillared house the tall young son wandered aimlessly
about after his father's abrupt departure.  In the house there was
little to interest him; the books were old and stale, the local
newspaper flat, and the women had retired with headaches and sewing.
He tried a nap, but it was too warm.  So he sauntered out into the
fields, complaining disconsolately, "Good Lord! how long will this
imprisonment last!"  He was not a bad fellow,--just a little spoiled
and self-indulgent, and as headstrong as his proud father.  He seemed a
young man pleasant to look upon, as he sat on the great black stump at
the edge of the pines idly swinging his legs and smoking.  "Why, there
isn't even a girl worth getting up a respectable flirtation with," he
growled.  Just then his eye caught a tall, willowy figure hurrying
toward him on the narrow path.  He looked with interest at first, and
then burst into a laugh as he said, "Well, I declare, if it isn't
Jennie, the little brown kitchen-maid!  Why, I never noticed before
what a trim little body she is.  Hello, Jennie!  Why, you haven't
kissed me since I came home," he said gaily.  The young girl stared at
him in surprise and confusion,--faltered something inarticulate, and
attempted to pass.  But a wilful mood had seized the young idler, and
he caught at her arm.  Frightened, she slipped by; and half
mischievously he turned and ran after her through the tall pines.

Yonder, toward the sea, at the end of the path, came John slowly, with
his head down.  He had turned wearily homeward from the schoolhouse;
then, thinking to shield his mother from the blow, started to meet his
sister as she came from work and break the news of his dismissal to
her.  "I'll go away," he said slowly; "I'll go away and find work, and
send for them.  I cannot live here longer."  And then the fierce,
buried anger surged up into his throat.  He waved his arms and hurried
wildly up the path.

The great brown sea lay silent.  The air scarce breathed.  The dying
day bathed the twisted oaks and mighty pines in black and gold.  There
came from the wind no warning, not a whisper from the cloudless sky.
There was only a black man hurrying on with an ache in his heart,
seeing neither sun nor sea, but starting as from a dream at the
frightened cry that woke the pines, to see his dark sister struggling
in the arms of a tall and fair-haired man.

He said not a word, but, seizing a fallen limb, struck him with all the
pent-up hatred of his great black arm, and the body lay white and still
beneath the pines, all bathed in sunshine and in blood.  John looked at
it dreamily, then walked back to the house briskly, and said in a soft
voice, "Mammy, I'm going away--I'm going to be free."

She gazed at him dimly and faltered, "No'th, honey, is yo' gwine No'th
agin?"

He looked out where the North Star glistened pale above the waters, and
said, "Yes, mammy, I'm going--North."

Then, without another word, he went out into the narrow lane, up by the
straight pines, to the same winding path, and seated himself on the
great black stump, looking at the blood where the body had lain.
Yonder in the gray past he had played with that dead boy, romping
together under the solemn trees.  The night deepened; he thought of the
boys at Johnstown.  He wondered how Brown had turned out, and Carey?
And Jones,--Jones?  Why, he was Jones, and he wondered what they would
all say when they knew, when they knew, in that great long dining-room
with its hundreds of merry eyes.  Then as the sheen of the starlight
stole over him, he thought of the gilded ceiling of that vast concert
hall, heard stealing toward him the faint sweet music of the swan.
Hark! was it music, or the hurry and shouting of men?  Yes, surely!
Clear and high the faint sweet melody rose and fluttered like a living
thing, so that the very earth trembled as with the tramp of horses and
murmur of angry men.

He leaned back and smiled toward the sea, whence rose the strange
melody, away from the dark shadows where lay the noise of horses
galloping, galloping on.  With an effort he roused himself, bent
forward, and looked steadily down the pathway, softly humming the "Song
of the Bride,"--

  "Freudig gefuhrt, ziehet dahin."

Amid the trees in the dim morning twilight he watched their shadows
dancing and heard their horses thundering toward him, until at last
they came sweeping like a storm, and he saw in front that haggard
white-haired man, whose eyes flashed red with fury.  Oh, how he pitied
him,--pitied him,--and wondered if he had the coiling twisted rope.
Then, as the storm burst round him, he rose slowly to his feet and
turned his closed eyes toward the Sea.

And the world whistled in his ears.




XIV

Of the Sorrow Songs

  I walk through the churchyard
      To lay this body down;
  I know moon-rise, I know star-rise;
  I walk in the moonlight, I walk in the starlight;
  I'll lie in the grave and stretch out my arms,
  I'll go to judgment in the evening of the day,
  And my soul and thy soul shall meet that day,
      When I lay this body down.

  NEGRO SONG.


They that walked in darkness sang songs in the olden days--Sorrow
Songs--for they were weary at heart.  And so before each thought that I
have written in this book I have set a phrase, a haunting echo of these
weird old songs in which the soul of the black slave spoke to men.
Ever since I was a child these songs have stirred me strangely.  They
came out of the South unknown to me, one by one, and yet at once I knew
them as of me and of mine.  Then in after years when I came to
Nashville I saw the great temple builded of these songs towering over
the pale city.  To me Jubilee Hall seemed ever made of the songs
themselves, and its bricks were red with the blood and dust of toil.
Out of them rose for me morning, noon, and night, bursts of wonderful
melody, full of the voices of my brothers and sisters, full of the
voices of the past.

Little of beauty has America given the world save the rude grandeur God
himself stamped on her bosom; the human spirit in this new world has
expressed itself in vigor and ingenuity rather than in beauty.  And so
by fateful chance the Negro folk-song--the rhythmic cry of the
slave--stands to-day not simply as the sole American music, but as the
most beautiful expression of human experience born this side the seas.
It has been neglected, it has been, and is, half despised, and above
all it has been persistently mistaken and misunderstood; but
notwithstanding, it still remains as the singular spiritual heritage of
the nation and the greatest gift of the Negro people.

Away back in the thirties the melody of these slave songs stirred the
nation, but the songs were soon half forgotten.  Some, like "Near the
lake where drooped the willow," passed into current airs and their
source was forgotten; others were caricatured on the "minstrel" stage
and their memory died away.  Then in war-time came the singular Port
Royal experiment after the capture of Hilton Head, and perhaps for the
first time the North met the Southern slave face to face and heart to
heart with no third witness.  The Sea Islands of the Carolinas, where
they met, were filled with a black folk of primitive type, touched and
moulded less by the world about them than any others outside the Black
Belt.  Their appearance was uncouth, their language funny, but their
hearts were human and their singing stirred men with a mighty power.
Thomas Wentworth Higginson hastened to tell of these songs, and Miss
McKim and others urged upon the world their rare beauty.  But the world
listened only half credulously until the Fisk Jubilee Singers sang the
slave songs so deeply into the world's heart that it can never wholly
forget them again.

There was once a blacksmith's son born at Cadiz, New York, who in the
changes of time taught school in Ohio and helped defend Cincinnati from
Kirby Smith.  Then he fought at Chancellorsville and Gettysburg and
finally served in the Freedmen's Bureau at Nashville.  Here he formed a
Sunday-school class of black children in 1866, and sang with them and
taught them to sing.  And then they taught him to sing, and when once
the glory of the Jubilee songs passed into the soul of George L. White,
he knew his life-work was to let those Negroes sing to the world as
they had sung to him.  So in 1871 the pilgrimage of the Fisk Jubilee
Singers began.  North to Cincinnati they rode,--four half-clothed black
boys and five girl-women,--led by a man with a cause and a purpose.
They stopped at Wilberforce, the oldest of Negro schools, where a black
bishop blessed them.  Then they went, fighting cold and starvation,
shut out of hotels, and cheerfully sneered at, ever northward; and ever
the magic of their song kept thrilling hearts, until a burst of
applause in the Congregational Council at Oberlin revealed them to the
world.  They came to New York and Henry Ward Beecher dared to welcome
them, even though the metropolitan dailies sneered at his "Nigger
Minstrels."  So their songs conquered till they sang across the land
and across the sea, before Queen and Kaiser, in Scotland and Ireland,
Holland and Switzerland.  Seven years they sang, and brought back a
hundred and fifty thousand dollars to found Fisk University.

Since their day they have been imitated--sometimes well, by the singers
of Hampton and Atlanta, sometimes ill, by straggling quartettes.
Caricature has sought again to spoil the quaint beauty of the music,
and has filled the air with many debased melodies which vulgar ears
scarce know from the real.  But the true Negro folk-song still lives in
the hearts of those who have heard them truly sung and in the hearts of
the Negro people.

What are these songs, and what do they mean?  I know little of music
and can say nothing in technical phrase, but I know something of men,
and knowing them, I know that these songs are the articulate message of
the slave to the world.  They tell us in these eager days that life was
joyous to the black slave, careless and happy.  I can easily believe
this of some, of many.  But not all the past South, though it rose from
the dead, can gainsay the heart-touching witness of these songs.  They
are the music of an unhappy people, of the children of disappointment;
they tell of death and suffering and unvoiced longing toward a truer
world, of misty wanderings and hidden ways.

The songs are indeed the siftings of centuries; the music is far more
ancient than the words, and in it we can trace here and there signs of
development.  My grandfather's grandmother was seized by an evil Dutch
trader two centuries ago; and coming to the valleys of the Hudson and
Housatonic, black, little, and lithe, she shivered and shrank in the
harsh north winds, looked longingly at the hills, and often crooned a
heathen melody to the child between her knees, thus:

  Do ba-na co-ba, ge-ne me, ge-ne me!
  Do ba-na co-ba, ge-ne me, ge-ne me!
  Ben d' nu-li, nu-li, nu-li, ben d' le.


The child sang it to his children and they to their children's
children, and so two hundred years it has travelled down to us and we
sing it to our children, knowing as little as our fathers what its
words may mean, but knowing well the meaning of its music.

This was primitive African music; it may be seen in larger form in the
strange chant which heralds "The Coming of John":

  "You may bury me in the East,
   You may bury me in the West,
   But I'll hear the trumpet sound in that morning,"

--the voice of exile.

Ten master songs, more or less, one may pluck from the forest of
melody-songs of undoubted Negro origin and wide popular currency, and
songs peculiarly characteristic of the slave.  One of these I have just
mentioned.  Another whose strains begin this book is "Nobody knows the
trouble I've seen."  When, struck with a sudden poverty, the United
States refused to fulfill its promises of land to the freedmen, a
brigadier-general went down to the Sea Islands to carry the news.  An
old woman on the outskirts of the throng began singing this song; all
the mass joined with her, swaying.  And the soldier wept.

The third song is the cradle-song of death which all men know,-"Swing
low, sweet chariot,"--whose bars begin the life story of "Alexander
Crummell."  Then there is the song of many waters, "Roll, Jordan,
roll," a mighty chorus with minor cadences.  There were many songs of
the fugitive like that which opens "The Wings of Atalanta," and the
more familiar "Been a-listening."  The seventh is the song of the End
and the Beginning--"My Lord, what a mourning! when the stars begin to
fall"; a strain of this is placed before "The Dawn of Freedom."  The
song of groping--"My way's cloudy"--begins "The Meaning of Progress";
the ninth is the song of this chapter--"Wrestlin' Jacob, the day is
a-breaking,"--a paean of hopeful strife.  The last master song is the
song of songs--"Steal away,"--sprung from "The Faith of the Fathers."

There are many others of the Negro folk-songs as striking and
characteristic as these, as, for instance, the three strains in the
third, eighth, and ninth chapters; and others I am sure could easily
make a selection on more scientific principles.  There are, too, songs
that seem to be a step removed from the more primitive types: there is
the maze-like medley, "Bright sparkles," one phrase of which heads "The
Black Belt"; the Easter carol, "Dust, dust and ashes"; the dirge, "My
mother's took her flight and gone home"; and that burst of melody
hovering over "The Passing of the First-Born"--"I hope my mother will
be there in that beautiful world on high."

These represent a third step in the development of the slave song, of
which "You may bury me in the East" is the first, and songs like "March
on" (chapter six) and "Steal away" are the second.  The first is
African music, the second Afro-American, while the third is a blending
of Negro music with the music heard in the foster land.  The result is
still distinctively Negro and the method of blending original, but the
elements are both Negro and Caucasian.  One might go further and find a
fourth step in this development, where the songs of white America have
been distinctively influenced by the slave songs or have incorporated
whole phrases of Negro melody, as "Swanee River" and "Old Black Joe."
Side by side, too, with the growth has gone the debasements and
imitations--the Negro "minstrel" songs, many of the "gospel" hymns, and
some of the contemporary "coon" songs,--a mass of music in which the
novice may easily lose himself and never find the real Negro melodies.

In these songs, I have said, the slave spoke to the world.  Such a
message is naturally veiled and half articulate.  Words and music have
lost each other and new and cant phrases of a dimly understood theology
have displaced the older sentiment.  Once in a while we catch a strange
word of an unknown tongue, as the "Mighty Myo," which figures as a
river of death; more often slight words or mere doggerel are joined to
music of singular sweetness.  Purely secular songs are few in number,
partly because many of them were turned into hymns by a change of
words, partly because the frolics were seldom heard by the stranger,
and the music less often caught.  Of nearly all the songs, however, the
music is distinctly sorrowful.  The ten master songs I have mentioned
tell in word and music of trouble and exile, of strife and hiding; they
grope toward some unseen power and sigh for rest in the End.

The words that are left to us are not without interest, and, cleared of
evident dross, they conceal much of real poetry and meaning beneath
conventional theology and unmeaning rhapsody.  Like all primitive folk,
the slave stood near to Nature's heart.  Life was a "rough and rolling
sea" like the brown Atlantic of the Sea Islands; the "Wilderness" was
the home of God, and the "lonesome valley" led to the way of life.
"Winter'll soon be over," was the picture of life and death to a
tropical imagination.  The sudden wild thunderstorms of the South awed
and impressed the Negroes,--at times the rumbling seemed to them
"mournful," at times imperious:

  "My Lord calls me,
  He calls me by the thunder,
  The trumpet sounds it in my soul."


The monotonous toil and exposure is painted in many words.  One sees
the ploughmen in the hot, moist furrow, singing:

  "Dere's no rain to wet you,
   Dere's no sun to burn you,
   Oh, push along, believer,
   I want to go home."


The bowed and bent old man cries, with thrice-repeated wail:

  "O Lord, keep me from sinking down,"

and he rebukes the devil of doubt who can whisper:

  "Jesus is dead and God's gone away."


Yet the soul-hunger is there, the restlessness of the savage, the wail
of the wanderer, and the plaint is put in one little phrase:

  My soul wants something that's new, that's new


Over the inner thoughts of the slaves and their relations one with
another the shadow of fear ever hung, so that we get but glimpses here
and there, and also with them, eloquent omissions and silences.  Mother
and child are sung, but seldom father; fugitive and weary wanderer call
for pity and affection, but there is little of wooing and wedding; the
rocks and the mountains are well known, but home is unknown.  Strange
blending of love and helplessness sings through the refrain:

  "Yonder's my ole mudder,
   Been waggin' at de hill so long;
  'Bout time she cross over,
   Git home bime-by."

Elsewhere comes the cry of the "motherless" and the "Farewell,
farewell, my only child."

Love-songs are scarce and fall into two categories--the frivolous and
light, and the sad.  Of deep successful love there is ominous silence,
and in one of the oldest of these songs there is a depth of history and
meaning:

  Poor Ro-sy, poor gal; Poor Ro-sy,
  poor gal; Ro-sy break my poor heart,
  Heav'n shall-a-be my home.


A black woman said of the song, "It can't be sung without a full heart
and a troubled sperrit."  The same voice sings here that sings in the
German folk-song:

    "Jetz Geh i' an's brunele, trink' aber net."


Of death the Negro showed little fear, but talked of it familiarly and
even fondly as simply a crossing of the waters, perhaps--who
knows?--back to his ancient forests again.  Later days transfigured his
fatalism, and amid the dust and dirt the toiler sang:

  "Dust, dust and ashes, fly over my grave,
   But the Lord shall bear my spirit home."


The things evidently borrowed from the surrounding world undergo
characteristic change when they enter the mouth of the slave.
Especially is this true of Bible phrases.  "Weep, O captive daughter of
Zion," is quaintly turned into "Zion, weep-a-low," and the wheels of
Ezekiel are turned every way in the mystic dreaming of the slave, till
he says:

 "There's a little wheel a-turnin' in-a-my heart."


As in olden time, the words of these hymns were improvised by some
leading minstrel of the religious band.  The circumstances of the
gathering, however, the rhythm of the songs, and the limitations of
allowable thought, confined the poetry for the most part to single or
double lines, and they seldom were expanded to quatrains or longer
tales, although there are some few examples of sustained efforts,
chiefly paraphrases of the Bible.  Three short series of verses have
always attracted me,--the one that heads this chapter, of one line of
which Thomas Wentworth Higginson has fittingly said, "Never, it seems
to me, since man first lived and suffered was his infinite longing for
peace uttered more plaintively."  The second and third are descriptions
of the Last Judgment,--the one a late improvisation, with some traces
of outside influence:


  "Oh, the stars in the elements are falling,
   And the moon drips away into blood,
   And the ransomed of the Lord are returning unto God,
   Blessed be the name of the Lord."

And the other earlier and homelier picture from the low coast lands:

  "Michael, haul the boat ashore,
   Then you'll hear the horn they blow,
   Then you'll hear the trumpet sound,
   Trumpet sound the world around,
   Trumpet sound for rich and poor,
   Trumpet sound the Jubilee,
   Trumpet sound for you and me."


Through all the sorrow of the Sorrow Songs there breathes a hope--a
faith in the ultimate justice of things.  The minor cadences of despair
change often to triumph and calm confidence.  Sometimes it is faith in
life, sometimes a faith in death, sometimes assurance of boundless
justice in some fair world beyond.  But whichever it is, the meaning is
always clear: that sometime, somewhere, men will judge men by their
souls and not by their skins.  Is such a hope justified?  Do the Sorrow
Songs sing true?

The silently growing assumption of this age is that the probation of
races is past, and that the backward races of to-day are of proven
inefficiency and not worth the saving.  Such an assumption is the
arrogance of peoples irreverent toward Time and ignorant of the deeds
of men.  A thousand years ago such an assumption, easily possible,
would have made it difficult for the Teuton to prove his right to life.
Two thousand years ago such dogmatism, readily welcome, would have
scouted the idea of blond races ever leading civilization.  So wofully
unorganized is sociological knowledge that the meaning of progress, the
meaning of "swift" and "slow" in human doing, and the limits of human
perfectability, are veiled, unanswered sphinxes on the shores of
science.  Why should AEschylus have sung two thousand years before
Shakespeare was born?  Why has civilization flourished in Europe, and
flickered, flamed, and died in Africa?  So long as the world stands
meekly dumb before such questions, shall this nation proclaim its
ignorance and unhallowed prejudices by denying freedom of opportunity
to those who brought the Sorrow Songs to the Seats of the Mighty?

Your country?  How came it yours?  Before the Pilgrims landed we were
here.  Here we have brought our three gifts and mingled them with
yours: a gift of story and song--soft, stirring melody in an
ill-harmonized and unmelodious land; the gift of sweat and brawn to
beat back the wilderness, conquer the soil, and lay the foundations of
this vast economic empire two hundred years earlier than your weak
hands could have done it; the third, a gift of the Spirit.  Around us
the history of the land has centred for thrice a hundred years; out of
the nation's heart we have called all that was best to throttle and
subdue all that was worst; fire and blood, prayer and sacrifice, have
billowed over this people, and they have found peace only in the altars
of the God of Right.  Nor has our gift of the Spirit been merely
passive.  Actively we have woven ourselves with the very warp and woof
of this nation,--we fought their battles, shared their sorrow, mingled
our blood with theirs, and generation after generation have pleaded
with a headstrong, careless people to despise not Justice, Mercy, and
Truth, lest the nation be smitten with a curse.  Our song, our toil,
our cheer, and warning have been given to this nation in
blood-brotherhood.  Are not these gifts worth the giving?  Is not this
work and striving?  Would America have been America without her Negro
people?

Even so is the hope that sang in the songs of my fathers well sung.  If
somewhere in this whirl and chaos of things there dwells Eternal Good,
pitiful yet masterful, then anon in His good time America shall rend
the Veil and the prisoned shall go free.  Free, free as the sunshine
trickling down the morning into these high windows of mine, free as
yonder fresh young voices welling up to me from the caverns of brick
and mortar below--swelling with song, instinct with life, tremulous
treble and darkening bass.  My children, my little children, are
singing to the sunshine, and thus they sing:

  Let us cheer the wea-ry trav-el-ler,
  Cheer the wea-ry trav-el-ler, Let us
  cheer the wea-ry trav-el-ler
  A-long the heav-en-ly way.

And the traveller girds himself, and sets his face toward the Morning,
and goes his way.




The Afterthought

Hear my cry, O God the Reader; vouchsafe that this my book fall not
still-born into the world wilderness.  Let there spring, Gentle One,
from out its leaves vigor of thought and thoughtful deed to reap the
harvest wonderful.  Let the ears of a guilty people tingle with truth,
and seventy millions sigh for the righteousness which exalteth nations,
in this drear day when human brotherhood is mockery and a snare.  Thus
in Thy good time may infinite reason turn the tangle 
                         THE SUPPRESSION OF THE
                           AFRICAN SLAVE-TRADE
                                 TO THE
                              UNITED STATES
                               OF AMERICA
                                1638-1870

                                Volume I
                        Harvard Historical Studies

                                  1896

                        Longmans, Green, and Co.
                                New York

                   *       *       *       *       *




Preface


This monograph was begun during my residence as Rogers Memorial Fellow
at Harvard University, and is based mainly upon a study of the sources,
i.e., national, State, and colonial statutes, Congressional documents,
reports of societies, personal narratives, etc. The collection of laws
available for this research was, I think, nearly complete; on the other
hand, facts and statistics bearing on the economic side of the study
have been difficult to find, and my conclusions are consequently liable
to modification from this source.

The question of the suppression of the slave-trade is so intimately
connected with the questions as to its rise, the system of American
slavery, and the whole colonial policy of the eighteenth century, that
it is difficult to isolate it, and at the same time to avoid
superficiality on the one hand, and unscientific narrowness of view on
the other. While I could not hope entirely to overcome such a
difficulty, I nevertheless trust that I have succeeded in rendering this
monograph a small contribution to the scientific study of slavery and
the American Negro.

I desire to express my obligation to Dr. Albert Bushnell Hart, of
Harvard University, at whose suggestion I began this work and by whose
kind aid and encouragement I have brought it to a close; also I have to
thank the trustees of the John F. Slater Fund, whose appointment made it
possible to test the conclusions of this study by the general principles
laid down in German universities.

                                                 W.E. BURGHARDT DU BOIS.

WILBERFORCE UNIVERSITY,
    March, 1896.

                   *       *       *       *       *




Contents


CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY

  1. _Plan of the Monograph_                                         9
  2. _The Rise of the English Slave-Trade_                           9


CHAPTER II
THE PLANTING COLONIES

  3. _Character of these Colonies_                                  15
  4. _Restrictions in Georgia_                                      15
  5. _Restrictions in South Carolina_                               16
  6. _Restrictions in North Carolina_                               19
  7. _Restrictions in Virginia_                                     19
  8. _Restrictions in Maryland_                                     22
  9. _General Character of these Restrictions_                      23


CHAPTER III
THE FARMING COLONIES

  10. _Character of these Colonies_                                 24
  11. _The Dutch Slave-Trade_                                       24
  12. _Restrictions in New York_                                    25
  13. _Restrictions in Pennsylvania and Delaware_                   28
  14. _Restrictions in New Jersey_                                  32
  15. _General Character of these Restrictions_                     33


CHAPTER IV
THE TRADING COLONIES

  16. _Character of these Colonies_                                 34
  17. _New England and the Slave-Trade_                             34
  18. _Restrictions in New Hampshire_                               36
  19. _Restrictions in Massachusetts_                               37
  20. _Restrictions in Rhode Island_                                40
  21. _Restrictions in Connecticut_                                 43
  22. _General Character of these Restrictions_                     44


CHAPTER V
THE PERIOD OF THE REVOLUTION, 1774-1787

  23. _The Situation in 1774_                                       45
  24. _The Condition of the Slave-Trade_                            46
  25. _The Slave-Trade and the "Association"_                       47
  26. _The Action of the Colonies_                                  48
  27. _The Action of the Continental Congress_                      49
  28. _Reception of the Slave-Trade Resolution_                     51
  29. _Results of the Resolution_                                   52
  30. _The Slave-Trade and Public Opinion after the War_            53
  31. _The Action of the Confederation_                             56


CHAPTER VI
THE FEDERAL CONVENTION, 1787

  32. _The First Proposition_                                       58
  33. _The General Debate_                                          59
  34. _The Special Committee and the "Bargain"_                     62
  35. _The Appeal to the Convention_                                64
  36. _Settlement by the Convention_                                66
  37. _Reception of the Clause by the Nation_                       67
  38. _Attitude of the State Conventions_                           70
  39. _Acceptance of the Policy_                                    72


CHAPTER VII
TOUSSAINT L'OUVERTURE AND ANTI-SLAVERY EFFORT, 1787-1807

  40. _Influence of the Haytian Revolution_                         74
  41. _Legislation of the Southern States_                          75
  42. _Legislation of the Border States_                            76
  43. _Legislation of the Eastern States_                           76
  44. _First Debate in Congress, 1789_                              77
  45. _Second Debate in Congress, 1790_                             79
  46. _The Declaration of Powers, 1790_                             82
  47. _The Act of 1794_                                             83
  48. _The Act of 1800_                                             85
  49. _The Act of 1803_                                             87
  50. _State of the Slave-Trade from 1789 to 1803_                  88
  51. _The South Carolina Repeal of 1803_                           89
  52. _The Louisiana Slave-Trade, 1803-1805_                        91
  53. _Last Attempts at Taxation, 1805-1806_                        94
  54. _Key-Note of the Period_                                      96


CHAPTER VIII
THE PERIOD OF ATTEMPTED SUPPRESSION, 1807-1825

  55. _The Act of 1807_                                             97
  56. _The First Question: How shall illegally imported Africans
       be disposed of?_                                             99
  57. _The Second Question: How shall Violations be punished?_     104
  58. _The Third Question: How shall the Interstate Coastwise
       Slave-Trade be protected?_                                  106
  59. _Legislative History of the Bill_                            107
  60. _Enforcement of the Act_                                     111
  61. _Evidence of the Continuance of the Trade_                   112
  62. _Apathy of the Federal Government_                           115
  63. _Typical Cases_                                              120
  64. _The Supplementary Acts, 1818-1820_                          121
  65. _Enforcement of the Supplementary Acts, 1818-1825_           126


CHAPTER IX
THE INTERNATIONAL STATUS OF THE SLAVE-TRADE, 1783-1862

  66. _The Rise of the Movement against the Slave-Trade,
       1788-1807_                                                  133
  67. _Concerted Action of the Powers, 1783-1814_                  134
  68. _Action of the Powers from 1814 to 1820_                     136
  69. _The Struggle for an International Right of Search,
       1820-1840_                                                  137
  70. _Negotiations of 1823-1825_                                  140
  71. _The Attitude of the United States and the State of the
       Slave-Trade_                                                142
  72. _The Quintuple Treaty, 1839-1842_                            145
  73. _Final Concerted Measures, 1842-1862_                        148


CHAPTER X
THE RISE OF THE COTTON KINGDOM, 1820-1850

  74. _The Economic Revolution_                                    152
  75. _The Attitude of the South_                                  154
  76. _The Attitude of the North and Congress_                     156
  77. _Imperfect Application of the Laws_                          159
  78. _Responsibility of the Government_                           161
  79. _Activity of the Slave-Trade, 1820-1850_                     163


CHAPTER XI
THE FINAL CRISIS, 1850-1870

  80. _The Movement against the Slave-Trade Laws_                  168
  81. _Commercial Conventions of 1855-1856_                        169
  82. _Commercial Conventions of 1857-1858_                        170
  83. _Commercial Convention of 1859_                              172
  84. _Public Opinion in the South_                                173
  85. _The Question in Congress_                                   174
  86. _Southern Policy in 1860_                                    176
  87. _Increase of the Slave-Trade from 1850 to 1860_              178
  88. _Notorious Infractions of the Laws_                          179
  89. _Apathy of the Federal Government_                           182
  90. _Attitude of the Southern Confederacy_                       187
  91. _Attitude of the United States_                              190


CHAPTER XII
THE ESSENTIALS IN THE STRUGGLE

  92. _How the Question Arose_                                     193
  93. _The Moral Movement_                                         194
  94. _The Political Movement_                                     195
  95. _The Economic Movement_                                      195
  96. _The Lesson for Americans_                                   196


APPENDICES

  A. _A Chronological Conspectus of Colonial and State Legislation
      restricting the African Slave-Trade, 1641-1787_              199

  B. _A Chronological Conspectus of State, National, and
      International Legislation, 1788-1871_                        234

  C. _Typical Cases of Vessels engaged in the American Slave-Trade,
      1619-1864_                                                   306

  D. _Bibliography_                                                316


INDEX                                                              347

                   *       *       *       *       *




_Chapter I_

INTRODUCTORY.

  1. Plan of the Monograph.
  2. The Rise of the English Slave-Trade.


1. ~Plan of the Monograph.~ This monograph proposes to set forth the
efforts made in the United States of America, from early colonial times
until the present, to limit and suppress the trade in slaves between
Africa and these shores.

The study begins with the colonial period, setting forth in brief the
attitude of England and, more in detail, the attitude of the planting,
farming, and trading groups of colonies toward the slave-trade. It deals
next with the first concerted effort against the trade and with the
further action of the individual States. The important work of the
Constitutional Convention follows, together with the history of the
trade in that critical period which preceded the Act of 1807. The
attempt to suppress the trade from 1807 to 1830 is next recounted. A
chapter then deals with the slave-trade as an international problem.
Finally the development of the crises up to the Civil War is studied,
together with the steps leading to the final suppression; and a
concluding chapter seeks to sum up the results of the investigation.
Throughout the monograph the institution of slavery and the interstate
slave-trade are considered only incidentally.


2. ~The Rise of the English Slave-Trade.~ Any attempt to consider the
attitude of the English colonies toward the African slave-trade must be
prefaced by a word as to the attitude of England herself and the
development of the trade in her hands.[1]

Sir John Hawkins's celebrated voyage took place in 1562, but probably
not until 1631[2] did a regular chartered company undertake to carry on
the trade.[3] This company was unsuccessful,[4] and was eventually
succeeded by the "Company of Royal Adventurers trading to Africa,"
chartered by Charles II. in 1662, and including the Queen Dowager and
the Duke of York.[5] The company contracted to supply the West Indies
with three thousand slaves annually; but contraband trade, misconduct,
and war so reduced it that in 1672 it surrendered its charter to another
company for Â£34,000.[6] This new corporation, chartered by Charles II.
as the "Royal African Company," proved more successful than its
predecessors, and carried on a growing trade for a quarter of a century.

In 1698 Parliamentary interference with the trade began. By the Statute
9 and 10 William and Mary, chapter 26, private traders, on payment of a
duty of 10% on English goods exported to Africa, were allowed to
participate in the trade. This was brought about by the clamor of the
merchants, especially the "American Merchants," who "in their Petition
suggest, that it would be a great Benefit to the Kingdom to secure the
Trade by maintaining Forts and Castles there, with an equal Duty upon
all Goods exported."[7] This plan, being a compromise between
maintaining the monopoly intact and entirely abolishing it, was adopted,
and the statute declared the trade "highly Beneficial and Advantageous
to this Kingdom, and to the Plantations and Colonies thereunto
belonging."

Having thus gained practically free admittance to the field, English
merchants sought to exclude other nations by securing a monopoly of the
lucrative Spanish colonial slave-trade. Their object was finally
accomplished by the signing of the Assiento in 1713.[8]

The Assiento was a treaty between England and Spain by which the latter
granted the former a monopoly of the Spanish colonial slave-trade for
thirty years, and England engaged to supply the colonies within that
time with at least 144,000 slaves, at the rate of 4,800 per year.
England was also to advance Spain 200,000 crowns, and to pay a duty of
33Â½ crowns for each slave imported. The kings of Spain and England were
each to receive one-fourth of the profits of the trade, and the Royal
African Company were authorized to import as many slaves as they wished
above the specified number in the first twenty-five years, and to sell
them, except in three ports, at any price they could get.

It is stated that, in the twenty years from 1713 to 1733, fifteen
thousand slaves were annually imported into America by the English, of
whom from one-third to one-half went to the Spanish colonies.[9] To the
company itself the venture proved a financial failure; for during the
years 1729-1750 Parliament assisted the Royal Company by annual grants
which amounted to Â£90,000,[10] and by 1739 Spain was a creditor to the
extent of Â£68,000, and threatened to suspend the treaty. The war
interrupted the carrying out of the contract, but the Peace of
Aix-la-Chapelle extended the limit by four years. Finally, October 5,
1750, this privilege was waived for a money consideration paid to
England; the Assiento was ended, and the Royal Company was bankrupt.

By the Statute 23 George II., chapter 31, the old company was dissolved
and a new "Company of Merchants trading to Africa" erected in its
stead.[11] Any merchant so desiring was allowed to engage in the trade
on payment of certain small duties, and such merchants formed a company
headed by nine directors. This marked the total abolition of monopoly in
the slave-trade, and was the form under which the trade was carried on
until after the American Revolution.

That the slave-trade was the very life of the colonies had, by 1700,
become an almost unquestioned axiom in British practical economics. The
colonists themselves declared slaves "the strength and sinews of this
western world,"[12] and the lack of them "the grand obstruction"[13]
here, as the settlements "cannot subsist without supplies of them."[14]
Thus, with merchants clamoring at home and planters abroad, it easily
became the settled policy of England to encourage the slave-trade. Then,
too, she readily argued that what was an economic necessity in Jamaica
and the Barbadoes could scarcely be disadvantageous to Carolina,
Virginia, or even New York. Consequently, the colonial governors were
generally instructed to "give all due encouragement and invitation to
merchants and others, ... and in particular to the royal African company
of England."[15] Duties laid on the importer, and all acts in any way
restricting the trade, were frowned upon and very often disallowed.
"Whereas," ran Governor Dobbs's instructions, "Acts have been passed in
some of our Plantations in America for laying duties on the importation
and exportation of Negroes to the great discouragement of the Merchants
trading thither from the coast of Africa.... It is our Will and Pleasure
that you do not give your assent to or pass any Law imposing duties upon
Negroes imported into our Province of North Carolina."[16]

The exact proportions of the slave-trade to America can be but
approximately determined. From 1680 to 1688 the African Company sent 249
ships to Africa, shipped there 60,783 Negro slaves, and after losing
14,387 on the middle passage, delivered 46,396 in America. The trade
increased early in the eighteenth century, 104 ships clearing for Africa
in 1701; it then dwindled until the signing of the Assiento, standing at
74 clearances in 1724. The final dissolution of the monopoly in 1750
led--excepting in the years 1754-57, when the closing of Spanish marts
sensibly affected the trade--to an extraordinary development, 192
clearances being made in 1771. The Revolutionary War nearly stopped the
traffic; but by 1786 the clearances had risen again to 146.

To these figures must be added the unregistered trade of Americans and
foreigners. It is probable that about 25,000 slaves were brought to
America each year between 1698 and 1707. The importation then dwindled,
but rose after the Assiento to perhaps 30,000. The proportion, too, of
these slaves carried to the continent now began to increase. Of about
20,000 whom the English annually imported from 1733 to 1766, South
Carolina alone received some 3,000. Before the Revolution, the total
exportation to America is variously estimated as between 40,000 and
100,000 each year. Bancroft places the total slave population of the
continental colonies at 59,000 in 1714, 78,000 in 1727, and 293,000 in
1754. The census of 1790 showed 697,897 slaves in the United States.[17]

In colonies like those in the West Indies and in South Carolina and
Georgia, the rapid importation into America of a multitude of savages
gave rise to a system of slavery far different from that which the late
Civil War abolished. The strikingly harsh and even inhuman slave codes
in these colonies show this. Crucifixion, burning, and starvation were
legal modes of punishment.[18] The rough and brutal character of the
time and place was partly responsible for this, but a more decisive
reason lay in the fierce and turbulent character of the imported
Negroes. The docility to which long years of bondage and strict
discipline gave rise was absent, and insurrections and acts of violence
were of frequent occurrence.[19] Again and again the danger of planters
being "cut off by their own negroes"[20] is mentioned, both in the
islands and on the continent. This condition of vague dread and unrest
not only increased the severity of laws and strengthened the police
system, but was the prime motive back of all the earlier efforts to
check the further importation of slaves.

On the other hand, in New England and New York the Negroes were merely
house servants or farm hands, and were treated neither better nor worse
than servants in general in those days. Between these two extremes, the
system of slavery varied from a mild serfdom in Pennsylvania and New
Jersey to an aristocratic caste system in Maryland and Virginia.


FOOTNOTES:

  [1] This account is based largely on the _Report of the Lords
      of the Committee of Council_, etc. (London, 1789).

  [2] African trading-companies had previously been erected
     (e.g. by Elizabeth in 1585 and 1588, and by James I. in 1618);
      but slaves are not specifically mentioned in their charters,
      and they probably did not trade in slaves. Cf. Bandinel,
      _Account of the Slave Trade_ (1842), pp. 38-44.

  [3] Chartered by Charles I. Cf. Sainsbury, _Cal. State Papers,
      Col. Ser., America and W. Indies, 1574-1660_, p. 135.

  [4] In 1651, during the Protectorate, the privileges of the
      African trade were granted anew to this same company for
      fourteen years. Cf. Sainsbury, _Cal. State Papers, Col. Ser.,
      America and W. Indies, 1574-1660_, pp. 342, 355.

  [5] Sainsbury, _Cal. State Papers, Col. Ser., America and W.
      Indies, 1661-1668_, Â§ 408.

  [6] Sainsbury, _Cal. State Papers, Col. Ser., America and W.
      Indies, 1669-1674_, Â§Â§ 934, 1095.

  [7] Quoted in the above _Report_, under "Most Material
      Proceedings in the House of Commons," Vol. I. Part I. An import
      duty of 10% on all goods, except Negroes, imported from Africa
      to England and the colonies was also laid. The proceeds of
      these duties went to the Royal African Company.

  [8] Cf. Appendix A.

  [9] Bandinel, _Account of the Slave Trade_, p. 59. Cf. Bryan
      Edwards, _History of the British Colonies in the W. Indies_
      (London, 1798), Book VI.

 [10] From 1729 to 1788, including compensation to the old
      company, Parliament expended Â£705,255 on African companies. Cf.
      _Report_, etc., as above.

 [11] Various amendatory statutes were passed: e.g., 24 George
      II. ch. 49, 25 George II. ch. 40, 4 George III. ch. 20, 5
      George III. ch. 44, 23 George III. ch. 65.

 [12] Renatus Enys from Surinam, in 1663: Sainsbury, _Cal.
      State Papers, Col. Ser., America and W. Indies, 1661-68_, Â§
      577.

 [13] Thomas Lynch from Jamaica, in 1665: Sainsbury, _Cal.
      State Papers, Col. Ser., America and W. Indies, 1661-68_, Â§
      934.

 [14] Lieutenant-Governor Willoughby of Barbadoes, in 1666:
      Sainsbury, _Cal. State Papers, Col. Ser., America and W.
      Indies, 1661-68_, Â§ 1281.

 [15] Smith, _History of New Jersey_ (1765), p. 254; Sainsbury,
      _Cal. State Papers, Col. Ser., America and W. Indies,
      1669-74_., Â§Â§ 367, 398, 812.

 [16] _N.C. Col. Rec._, V. 1118. For similar instructions, cf.
      _Penn. Archives_, I. 306; _Doc. rel. Col. Hist. New York_, VI.
      34; Gordon, _History of the American Revolution_, I. letter 2;
      _Mass. Hist. Soc. Coll._, 4th Ser. X. 642.

 [17] These figures are from the above-mentioned _Report_, Vol.
      II. Part IV. Nos. 1, 5. See also Bancroft, _History of the
      United States_ (1883), II. 274 ff; Bandinel, _Account of the
      Slave Trade_, p. 63; Benezet, _Caution to Great Britain_, etc.,
      pp. 39-40, and _Historical Account of Guinea_, ch. xiii.

 [18] Compare earlier slave codes in South Carolina, Georgia,
      Jamaica, etc.; also cf. Benezet, _Historical Account of
      Guinea_, p. 75; _Report_, etc., as above.

 [19] Sainsbury, _Cal. State Papers, Col. Ser., America and W.
      Indies, 1574-1660_, pp. 229, 271, 295; _1661-68_, Â§Â§ 61, 412,
      826, 1270, 1274, 1788; _1669-74_., Â§Â§ 508, 1244; Bolzius and
      Von Reck, _Journals_ (in Force, _Tracts_, Vol. IV. No. 5, pp.
      9, 18); _Proceedings of Governor and Assembly of Jamaica in
      regard to the Maroon Negroes_ (London, 1796).

 [20] Sainsbury, _Cal. State Papers, Col. Ser., America and W.
      Indies, 1661-68_, Â§ 1679.

                   *       *       *       *       *




_Chapter II_

THE PLANTING COLONIES.

  3. Character of these Colonies.
  4. Restrictions in Georgia.
  5. Restrictions in South Carolina.
  6. Restrictions in North Carolina.
  7. Restrictions in Virginia.
  8. Restrictions in Maryland.
  9. General Character of these Restrictions.


3. ~Character of these Colonies.~ The planting colonies are those
Southern settlements whose climate and character destined them to be the
chief theatre of North American slavery. The early attitude of these
communities toward the slave-trade is therefore of peculiar interest;
for their action was of necessity largely decisive for the future of the
trade and for the institution in North America. Theirs was the only
soil, climate, and society suited to slavery; in the other colonies,
with few exceptions, the institution was by these same factors doomed
from the beginning. Hence, only strong moral and political motives could
in the planting colonies overthrow or check a traffic so favored by the
mother country.


4. ~Restrictions in Georgia.~ In Georgia we have an example of a
community whose philanthropic founders sought to impose upon it a code
of morals higher than the colonists wished. The settlers of Georgia were
of even worse moral fibre than their slave-trading and whiskey-using
neighbors in Carolina and Virginia; yet Oglethorpe and the London
proprietors prohibited from the beginning both the rum and the slave
traffic, refusing to "suffer slavery (which is against the Gospel as
well as the fundamental law of England) to be authorised under our
authority."[1] The trustees sought to win the colonists over to their
belief by telling them that money could be better expended in
transporting white men than Negroes; that slaves would be a source of
weakness to the colony; and that the "Produces designed to be raised in
the Colony would not require such Labour as to make Negroes necessary
for carrying them on."[2]

This policy greatly displeased the colonists, who from 1735, the date of
the first law, to 1749, did not cease to clamor for the repeal of the
restrictions.[3] As their English agent said, they insisted that "In
Spight of all Endeavours to disguise this Point, it is as clear as Light
itself, that Negroes are as essentially necessary to the Cultivation of
_Georgia_, as Axes, Hoes, or any other Utensil of Agriculture."[4]
Meantime, evasions and infractions of the laws became frequent and
notorious. Negroes were brought across from Carolina and "hired" for
life.[5] "Finally, purchases were openly made in Savannah from African
traders: some seizures were made by those who opposed the principle, but
as a majority of the magistrates were favorable to the introduction of
slaves into the province, legal decisions were suspended from time to
time, and a strong disposition evidenced by the courts to evade the
operation of the law."[6] At last, in 1749, the colonists prevailed on
the trustees and the government, and the trade was thrown open under
careful restrictions, which limited importation, required a registry and
quarantine on all slaves brought in, and laid a duty.[7] It is probable,
however, that these restrictions were never enforced, and that the trade
thus established continued unchecked until the Revolution.


5. ~Restrictions in South Carolina.~[8] South Carolina had the largest
and most widely developed slave-trade of any of the continental
colonies. This was owing to the character of her settlers, her nearness
to the West Indian slave marts, and the early development of certain
staple crops, such as rice, which were adapted to slave labor.[9]
Moreover, this colony suffered much less interference from the home
government than many other colonies; thus it is possible here to trace
the untrammeled development of slave-trade restrictions in a typical
planting community.

As early as 1698 the slave-trade to South Carolina had reached such
proportions that it was thought that "the great number of negroes which
of late have been imported into this Collony may endanger the safety
thereof." The immigration of white servants was therefore encouraged by
a special law.[10] Increase of immigration reduced this disproportion,
but Negroes continued to be imported in such numbers as to afford
considerable revenue from a moderate duty on them. About the time when
the Assiento was signed, the slave-trade so increased that, scarcely a
year after the consummation of that momentous agreement, two heavy duty
acts were passed, because "the number of Negroes do extremely increase
in this Province, and through the afflicting providence of God, the
white persons do not proportionately multiply, by reason whereof, the
safety of the said Province is greatly endangered."[11] The trade,
however, by reason of the encouragement abroad and of increased business
activity in exporting naval stores at home, suffered scarcely any check,
although repeated acts, reciting the danger incident to a "great
importation of Negroes," were passed, laying high duties.[12] Finally,
in 1717, an additional duty of Â£40,[13] although due in depreciated
currency, succeeded so nearly in stopping the trade that, two years
later, all existing duties were repealed and one of Â£10 substituted.[14]
This continued during the time of resistance to the proprietary
government, but by 1734 the importation had again reached large
proportions. "We must therefore beg leave," the colonists write in that
year, "to inform your Majesty, that, amidst our other perilous
circumstances, we are subject to many intestine dangers from the great
number of negroes that are now among us, who amount at least to
twenty-two thousand persons, and are three to one of all your Majesty's
white subjects in this province. Insurrections against us have been
often attempted."[15] In 1740 an insurrection under a slave, Cato, at
Stono, caused such widespread alarm that a prohibitory duty of Â£100 was
immediately laid.[16] Importation was again checked; but in 1751 the
colony sought to devise a plan whereby the slightly restricted
immigration of Negroes should provide a fund to encourage the
importation of white servants, "to prevent the mischiefs that may be
attended by the great importation of negroes into this Province."[17]
Many white servants were thus encouraged to settle in the colony; but so
much larger was the influx of black slaves that the colony, in 1760,
totally prohibited the slave-trade. This act was promptly disallowed by
the Privy Council and the governor reprimanded;[18] but the colony
declared that "an importation of negroes, equal in number to what have
been imported of late years, may prove of the most dangerous consequence
in many respects to this Province, and the best way to obviate such
danger will be by imposing such an additional duty upon them as may
totally prevent the evils."[19] A prohibitive duty of Â£100 was
accordingly imposed in 1764.[20] This duty probably continued until the
Revolution.

The war made a great change in the situation. It has been computed by
good judges that, between the years 1775 and 1783, the State of South
Carolina lost twenty-five thousand Negroes, by actual hostilities,
plunder of the British, runaways, etc. After the war the trade quickly
revived, and considerable revenue was raised from duty acts until 1787,
when by act and ordinance the slave-trade was totally prohibited.[21]
This prohibition, by renewals from time to time, lasted until 1803.


6. ~Restrictions in North Carolina.~ In early times there were few
slaves in North Carolina;[22] this fact, together with the troubled and
turbulent state of affairs during the early colonial period, did not
necessitate the adoption of any settled policy toward slavery or the
slave-trade. Later the slave-trade to the colony increased; but there is
no evidence of any effort to restrict or in any way regulate it before
1786, when it was declared that "the importation of slaves into this
State is productive of evil consequences and highly impolitic,"[23] and
a prohibitive duty was laid on them.


7. ~Restrictions in Virginia.~[24] Next to South Carolina, Virginia had
probably the largest slave-trade. Her situation, however, differed
considerably from that of her Southern neighbor. The climate, the staple
tobacco crop, and the society of Virginia were favorable to a system of
domestic slavery, but one which tended to develop into a patriarchal
serfdom rather than into a slave-consuming industrial hierarchy. The
labor required by the tobacco crop was less unhealthy than that
connected with the rice crop, and the Virginians were, perhaps, on a
somewhat higher moral plane than the Carolinians. There was consequently
no such insatiable demand for slaves in the larger colony. On the other
hand, the power of the Virginia executive was peculiarly strong, and it
was not possible here to thwart the slave-trade policy of the home
government as easily as elsewhere.

Considering all these circumstances, it is somewhat difficult to
determine just what was the attitude of the early Virginians toward the
slave-trade. There is evidence, however, to show that although they
desired the slave-trade, the rate at which the Negroes were brought in
soon alarmed them. In 1710 a duty of Â£5 was laid on Negroes, but
Governor Spotswood "soon perceived that the laying so high a Duty on
Negros was intended to discourage the importation," and vetoed the
measure.[25] No further restrictive legislation was attempted for some
years, but whether on account of the attitude of the governor or the
desire of the inhabitants, is not clear. With 1723 begins a series of
acts extending down to the Revolution, which, so far as their contents
can be ascertained, seem to have been designed effectually to check the
slave-trade. Some of these acts, like those of 1723 and 1727, were
almost immediately disallowed.[26] The Act of 1732 laid a duty of 5%,
which was continued until 1769,[27] and all other duties were in
addition to this; so that by such cumulative duties the rate on slaves
reached 25% in 1755,[28] and 35% at the time of Braddock's
expedition.[29] These acts were found "very burthensome," "introductive
of many frauds," and "very inconvenient,"[30] and were so far repealed
that by 1761 the duty was only 15%. As now the Burgesses became more
powerful, two or more bills proposing restrictive duties were passed,
but disallowed.[31] By 1772 the anti-slave-trade feeling had become
considerably developed, and the Burgesses petitioned the king, declaring
that "The importation of slaves into the colonies from the coast of
Africa hath long been considered as a trade of great inhumanity, and
under its present encouragement, we have too much reason to fear _will
endanger the very existence_ of your Majesty's American dominions....
Deeply impressed with these sentiments, we most humbly beseech your
Majesty to remove _all those restraints_ on your Majesty's governors of
this colony, _which inhibit their assenting to such laws as might check
so very pernicious a commerce_."[32]

Nothing further appears to have been done before the war. When, in 1776,
the delegates adopted a Frame of Government, it was charged in this
document that the king had perverted his high office into a "detestable
and insupportable tyranny, by ... prompting our negroes to rise in arms
among us, those very negroes whom, by an inhuman use of his negative, he
hath refused us permission to exclude by law."[33] Two years later, in
1778, an "Act to prevent the further importation of Slaves" stopped
definitively the legal slave-trade to Virginia.[34]


8. ~Restrictions in Maryland.~[35] Not until the impulse of the Assiento
had been felt in America, did Maryland make any attempt to restrain a
trade from which she had long enjoyed a comfortable revenue. The Act of
1717, laying a duty of 40_s._,[36] may have been a mild restrictive
measure. The duties were slowly increased to 50_s._ in 1754,[37] and Â£4.
in 1763.[38] In 1771 a prohibitive duty of Â£9 was laid;[39] and in 1783,
after the war, all importation by sea was stopped and illegally imported
Negroes were freed.[40]

Compared with the trade to Virginia and the Carolinas, the slave-trade
to Maryland was small, and seems at no time to have reached proportions
which alarmed the inhabitants. It was regulated to the economic demand
by a slowly increasing tariff, and finally, after 1769, had nearly
ceased of its own accord before the restrictive legislation of
Revolutionary times.[41] Probably the proximity of Maryland to Virginia
made an independent slave-trade less necessary to her.


9. ~General Character of these Restrictions.~ We find in the planting
colonies all degrees of advocacy of the trade, from the passiveness of
Maryland to the clamor of Georgia. Opposition to the trade did not
appear in Georgia, was based almost solely on political fear of
insurrection in Carolina, and sprang largely from the same motive in
Virginia, mingled with some moral repugnance. As a whole, it may be said
that whatever opposition to the slave-trade there was in the planting
colonies was based principally on the political fear of insurrection.


FOOTNOTES:

  [1] Hoare, _Memoirs of Granville Sharp_ (1820), p. 157. For
      the act of prohibition, see W.B. Stevens, _History of Georgia_
      (1847), I. 311.

  [2] [B. Martyn, _Account of the Progress of Georgia_ (1741),
      pp. 9-10.]

  [3] Cf. Stevens, _History of Georgia_, I. 290 ff.

  [4] Stephens, _Account of the Causes_, etc., p. 8. Cf. also
      _Journal of Trustees_, II. 210; cited by Stevens, _History of
      Georgia_, I. 306.

  [5] McCall, _History of Georgia_ (1811), I. 206-7.

  [6] _Ibid._

  [7] _Pub. Rec. Office, Board of Trade_, Vol. X.; cited by C.C.
      Jones, _History of Georgia_ (1883), I. 422-5.

  [8] The following is a summary of the legislation of the
      colony of South Carolina; details will be found in Appendix
      A:--

       1698, Act to encourage the immigration of white servants.
       1703, Duty Act: 10_s._ on Africans, 20_s._ on other Negroes.
       1714,   "   "   additional duty.
       1714,   "   "   Â£2.
       1714-15, Duty Act: additional duty.
       1716,     "    "   Â£3 on Africans, Â£30 on colonial Negroes.
       1717,     "    "   Â£40 in addition to existing duties.
       1719,     "    "   Â£10 on Africans, Â£30 on colonial Negroes.
                            The Act of 1717, etc., was repealed.
       1721,     "    "   Â£10 on Africans, Â£50 on colonial Negroes.
       1722,     "    "        "     "      "       "         "
       1740,     "    "   Â£100 on Africans, Â£150 on colonial Negroes.
       1751,     "    "   Â£10  "     "      Â£50     "         "
       1760, Act prohibiting importation (Disallowed).
       1764, Duty Act: additional duty of Â£100.
       1783,     "    "   Â£3 on Africans, Â£20 on colonial Negroes.
       1784,     "    "        "     "    Â£5        "         "
       1787, Art and Ordinance prohibiting importation.

  [9] Cf. Hewatt, _Historical Account of S. Carolina and
      Georgia_ (1779), I. 120 ff.; reprinted in _S.C. Hist. Coll._
      (1836), I. 108 ff.

 [10] Cooper, _Statutes at Large of S. Carolina_, II. 153.

 [11] The text of the first act is not extant: cf. Cooper,
      _Statutes_, III. 56. For the second, see Cooper, VII. 365,
      367.

 [12] Cf. GrimkÃ©, _Public Laws of S. Carolina_, p. xvi, No.
      362; Cooper, _Statutes_, II. 649. Cf. also _Governor Johnson
      to the Board of Trade_, Jan. 12, 1719-20; reprinted in Rivers,
      _Early History of S. Carolina_ (1874), App., xii.

 [13] Cooper, _Statutes_, VII. 368.

 [14] _Ibid._, III. 56.

 [15] From a memorial signed by the governor, President of the
      Council, and Speaker of the House, dated April 9, 1734,
      printed in Hewatt, _Historical Account of S. Carolina and
      Georgia_ (1779), II. 39; reprinted in S.C. Hist. Coll. (1836),
      I. 305-6. Cf. _N.C. Col. Rec._, II. 421.

 [16] Cooper, _Statutes_, III. 556; GrimkÃ©, _Public Laws_, p.
      xxxi, No. 694. Cf. Ramsay, _History of S. Carolina_, I. 110.

 [17] Cooper, _Statutes_, III. 739.

 [18] The text of this law has not been found. Cf. Burge,
      _Commentaries on Colonial and Foreign Laws_, I. 737, note;
      Stevens, _History of Georgia_, I. 286. See instructions of the
      governor of New Hampshire, June 30, 1761, in Gordon, _History
      of the American Revolution_, I. letter 2.

 [19] Cooper, _Statutes_, IV. 187.

 [20] This duty avoided the letter of the English instructions
      by making the duty payable by the first purchasers, and not by
      the importers. Cf. Cooper, _Statutes_, IV. 187.

 [21] GrimkÃ©, Public Laws, p. lxviii, Nos. 1485, 1486; Cooper,
      _Statutes_, VII. 430.

 [22] Cf. _N.C. Col. Rec._, IV. 172.

 [23] Martin, _Iredell's Acts of Assembly_, I. 413, 492.

 [24] The following is a summary of the legislation of the
      colony of Virginia; details will be found in Appendix A:--

        1710, Duty Act: proposed duty of Â£5.
        1723,  "    "   prohibitive (?).
        1727,  "    "        "
        1732,  "    "   5%.
        1736,  "    "   "
        1740,  "    "   additional duty of 5%.
        1754,  "    "        "       "     5%.
        1755,  "    "        "       "     10% (Repealed, 1760).
        1757,  "    "        "       "     10% (Repealed, 1761).
        1759,  "    "   20% on colonial slaves.
        1766,  "    "   additional duty of 10% (Disallowed?).
        1769,  "    "        "       "      "        "
        1772,  "    "   Â£5 on colonial slaves.
              Petition of Burgesses _vs._ Slave-trade.
        1776, Arraignment of the king in the adopted Frame of Government.
        1778, Importation prohibited.

 [25] _Letters of Governor Spotswood_, in _Va. Hist. Soc.
      Coll._, New Ser., I. 52.

 [26] Hening, _Statutes at Large of Virginia_, IV. 118, 182.

 [27] _Ibid._, IV. 317, 394; V. 28, 160, 318; VI. 217, 353;
      VII. 281; VIII. 190, 336, 532.

 [28] _Ibid._, V. 92; VI. 417, 419, 461, 466.

 [29] _Ibid._, VII. 69, 81.

 [30] _Ibid._, VII. 363, 383.

 [31] _Ibid._, VIII. 237, 337.

 [32] _Miscellaneous Papers, 1672-1865_, in _Va. Hist. Soc.
      Coll._, New Ser., VI. 14; Tucker, _Blackstone's Commentaries_,
      I. Part II. App., 51.

 [33] Hening, _Statutes_, IX. 112.

 [34] Importation by sea or by land was prohibited, with a
      penalty of Â£1000 for illegal importation and Â£500 for buying
      or selling. The Negro was freed, if illegally brought in. This
      law was revised somewhat in 1785. Cf. Hening, _Statutes_, IX.
      471; XII. 182.

 [35] The following is a summary of the legislation of the
      colony of Maryland; details will be found in Appendix A:--

        1695, Duty Act: 10_s._
        1704,  "    "   20_s._
        1715,  "    "    "
        1717,  "    "   additional duty of 40_s._ (?).
        1754,  "    "      "        "      10_s._, total 50_s._
        1756,  "    "      "        "      20_s._  "     40_s._ (?).
        1763,  "    "      "        "      Â£2    "     Â£4.
        1771,  "    "      "        "      Â£5    "     Â£9.
        1783, Importation prohibited.

 [36] _Compleat Coll. Laws of Maryland_ (ed. 1727), p. 191;
      Bacon, _Laws of Maryland at Large_, 1728, ch. 8.

 [37] Bacon, _Laws_, 1754, ch. 9, 14.

 [38] _Ibid._, 1763, ch. 28.

 [39] _Laws of Maryland since 1763_: 1771, ch. 7. Cf. _Ibid._:
      1777, sess. Feb.-Apr., ch. 18.

 [40] _Ibid._: 1783, sess. Apr.-June, ch. 23.

 [41] "The last importation of slaves into Maryland was, as I
      am credibly informed, in the year 1769": William Eddis,
      _Letters from America_ (London, 1792), p. 65, note.

      The number of slaves in Maryland has been estimated as follows:--

        In 1704,    4,475.  _Doc. rel. Col. Hist. New York_, V. 605.
         " 1710,    7,935.  _Ibid._
         " 1712,    8,330.  Scharf, _History of Maryland_, I. 377.
         " 1719,   25,000.  _Doc. rel. Col. Hist. New York_, V. 605.
         " 1748,   36,000.  McMahon, _History of Maryland_, I. 313.
         " 1755,   46,356.  _Gentleman's Magazine_, XXXIV. 261.
         " 1756,   46,225.  McMahon, _History of Maryland_, I. 313.
         " 1761,   49,675.  Dexter, _Colonial Population_, p. 21, note.
         " 1782,   83,362.  _EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica_ (9th ed.), XV. 603.
         " 1787,   80,000.  Dexter, _Colonial Population_, p. 21, note.

                   *       *       *       *       *




_Chapter III_

THE FARMING COLONIES.

  10. Character of these Colonies.
  11. The Dutch Slave-Trade.
  12. Restrictions in New York.
  13. Restrictions in Pennsylvania and Delaware.
  14. Restrictions in New Jersey.
  15. General Character of these Restrictions.


10. ~Character of these Colonies.~ The colonies of this group, occupying
the central portion of the English possessions, comprise those
communities where, on account of climate, physical characteristics, and
circumstances of settlement, slavery as an institution found but a
narrow field for development. The climate was generally rather cool for
the newly imported slaves, the soil was best suited to crops to which
slave labor was poorly adapted, and the training and habits of the great
body of settlers offered little chance for the growth of a slave system.
These conditions varied, of course, in different colonies; but the
general statement applies to all. These communities of small farmers and
traders derived whatever opposition they had to the slave-trade from
three sorts of motives,--economic, political, and moral. First, the
importation of slaves did not pay, except to supply a moderate demand
for household servants. Secondly, these colonies, as well as those in
the South, had a wholesome political fear of a large servile population.
Thirdly, the settlers of many of these colonies were of sterner moral
fibre than the Southern cavaliers and adventurers, and, in the absence
of great counteracting motives, were more easily led to oppose the
institution and the trade. Finally, it must be noted that these colonies
did not so generally regard themselves as temporary commercial
investments as did Virginia and Carolina. Intending to found permanent
States, these settlers from the first more carefully studied the
ultimate interests of those States.


11. ~The Dutch Slave-Trade.~ The Dutch seem to have commenced the
slave-trade to the American continent, the Middle colonies and some of
the Southern receiving supplies from them. John Rolfe relates that the
last of August, 1619, there came to Virginia "a dutch man of warre that
sold us twenty Negars."[1] This was probably one of the ships of the
numerous private Dutch trading-companies which early entered into and
developed the lucrative African slave-trade. Ships sailed from Holland
to Africa, got slaves in exchange for their goods, carried the slaves to
the West Indies or Brazil, and returned home laden with sugar.[2]
Through the enterprise of one of these trading-companies the settlement
of New Amsterdam was begun, in 1614. In 1621 the private companies
trading in the West were all merged into the Dutch West India Company,
and given a monopoly of American trade. This company was very active,
sending in four years 15,430 Negroes to Brazil,[3] carrying on war with
Spain, supplying even the English plantations,[4] and gradually becoming
the great slave carrier of the day.

The commercial supremacy of the Dutch early excited the envy and
emulation of the English. The Navigation Ordinance of 1651 was aimed at
them, and two wars were necessary to wrest the slave-trade from them and
place it in the hands of the English. The final terms of peace among
other things surrendered New Netherland to England, and opened the way
for England to become henceforth the world's greatest slave-trader.
Although the Dutch had thus commenced the continental slave-trade, they
had not actually furnished a very large number of slaves to the English
colonies outside the West Indies. A small trade had, by 1698, brought a
few thousand to New York, and still fewer to New Jersey.[5] It was left
to the English, with their strong policy in its favor, to develop this
trade.


12. ~Restrictions in New York.~[6] The early ordinances of the Dutch,
laying duties, generally of ten per cent, on slaves, probably proved
burdensome to the trade, although this was not intentional.[7] The
Biblical prohibition of slavery and the slave-trade, copied from New
England codes into the Duke of York's Laws, had no practical
application,[8] and the trade continued to be encouraged in the
governors' instructions. In 1709 a duty of Â£3 was laid on Negroes from
elsewhere than Africa.[9] This was aimed at West India slaves, and was
prohibitive. By 1716 the duty on all slaves was Â£1 12Â½_s._, which was
probably a mere revenue figure.[10] In 1728 a duty of 40_s._ was laid,
to be continued until 1737.[11] It proved restrictive, however, and on
the "humble petition of the Merchants and Traders of the City of
Bristol" was disallowed in 1735, as "greatly prejudicial to the Trade
and Navigation of this Kingdom."[12] Governor Cosby was also reminded
that no duties on slaves payable by the importer were to be laid. Later,
in 1753, the 40_s._ duty was restored, but under the increased trade of
those days was not felt.[13] No further restrictions seem to have been
attempted until 1785, when the sale of slaves in the State was
forbidden.[14]

The chief element of restriction in this colony appears to have been the
shrewd business sense of the traders, who never flooded the slave
market, but kept a supply sufficient for the slowly growing demand.
Between 1701 and 1726 only about 2,375 slaves were imported, and in 1774
the total slave population amounted to 21,149.[15] No restriction was
ever put by New York on participation in the trade outside the colony,
and in spite of national laws New York merchants continued to be engaged
in this traffic even down to the Civil War.[16]

Vermont, who withdrew from New York in 1777, in her first
Constitution[17] declared slavery illegal, and in 1786 stopped by law
the sale and transportation of slaves within her boundaries.[18]


13. ~Restrictions in Pennsylvania and Delaware.~[19] One of the first
American protests against the slave-trade came from certain German
Friends, in 1688, at a Weekly Meeting held in Germantown, Pennsylvania.
"These are the reasons," wrote "Garret henderich, derick up de graeff,
Francis daniell Pastorius, and Abraham up Den graef," "why we are
against the traffick of men-body, as followeth: Is there any that would
be done or handled at this manner?... Now, tho they are black, we cannot
conceive there is more liberty to have them slaves, as it is to have
other white ones. There is a saying, that we shall doe to all men like
as we will be done ourselves; making no difference of what generation,
descent or colour they are. And those who steal or robb men, and those
who buy or purchase them, are they not all alike?"[20] This little
leaven helped slowly to work a revolution in the attitude of this great
sect toward slavery and the slave-trade. The Yearly Meeting at first
postponed the matter, "It having so General a Relation to many other
Parts."[21] Eventually, however, in 1696, the Yearly Meeting advised
"That Friends be careful not to encourage the bringing in of any more
Negroes."[22] This advice was repeated in stronger terms for a
quarter-century,[23] and by that time Sandiford, Benezet, Lay, and
Woolman had begun their crusade. In 1754 the Friends took a step farther
and made the purchase of slaves a matter of discipline.[24] Four years
later the Yearly Meeting expressed itself clearly as "against every
branch of this practice," and declared that if "any professing with us
should persist to vindicate it, and be concerned in importing, selling
or purchasing slaves, the respective Monthly Meetings to which they
belong should manifest their disunion with such persons."[25] Further,
manumission was recommended, and in 1776 made compulsory.[26] The effect
of this attitude of the Friends was early manifested in the legislation
of all the colonies where the sect was influential, and particularly in
Pennsylvania.

One of the first duty acts (1710) laid a restrictive duty of 40_s._ on
slaves, and was eventually disallowed.[27] In 1712 William Southeby
petitioned the Assembly totally to abolish slavery. This the Assembly
naturally refused to attempt; but the same year, in response to another
petition "signed by many hands," they passed an "Act to prevent the
Importation of Negroes and Indians,"[28]--the first enactment of its
kind in America. This act was inspired largely by the general fear of
insurrection which succeeded the "Negro-plot" of 1712 in New York. It
declared: "Whereas, divers Plots and Insurrections have frequently
happened, not only in the Islands but on the Main Land of _America_, by
Negroes, which have been carried on so far that several of the
inhabitants have been barbarously Murthered, an Instance whereof we have
lately had in our Neighboring Colony of _New York_,"[29] etc. It then
proceeded to lay a prohibitive duty of Â£20 on all slaves imported. These
acts were quickly disposed of in England. Three duty acts affecting
Negroes, including the prohibitory act, were in 1713 disallowed, and it
was directed that "the Dep^{ty} Gov^{r} Council and Assembly of
Pensilvania, be & they are hereby Strictly Enjoyned & required not to
permit the said Laws ... to be from henceforward put in Execution."[30]
The Assembly repealed these laws, but in 1715 passed another laying a
duty of Â£5, which was also eventually disallowed.[31] Other acts, the
provisions of which are not clear, were passed in 1720 and 1722,[32] and
in 1725-1726 the duty on Negroes was raised to the restrictive figure of
Â£10.[33] This duty, for some reason not apparent, was lowered to Â£2 in
1729,[34] but restored again in 1761.[35] A struggle occurred over this
last measure, the Friends petitioning for it, and the Philadelphia
merchants against it, declaring that "We, the subscribers, ever desirous
to extend the Trade of this Province, have seen, for some time past,
the many inconveniencys the Inhabitants have suffer'd for want of
Labourers and artificers, ... have for some time encouraged the
importation of Negroes;" they prayed therefore at least for a delay in
passing the measure.[36] The law, nevertheless, after much debate and
altercation with the governor, finally passed.

These repeated acts nearly stopped the trade, and the manumission or
sale of Negroes by the Friends decreased the number of slaves in the
province. The rising spirit of independence enabled the colony, in 1773,
to restore the prohibitive duty of Â£20 and make it perpetual.[37] After
the Revolution unpaid duties on slaves were collected and the slaves
registered,[38] and in 1780 an "Act for the gradual Abolition of
Slavery" was passed.[39] As there were probably at no time before the
war more than 11,000 slaves in Pennsylvania,[40] the task thus
accomplished was not so formidable as in many other States. As it was,
participation in the slave-trade outside the colony was not prohibited
until 1788.[41]

It seems probable that in the original Swedish settlements along the
Delaware slavery was prohibited.[42] This measure had, however, little
practical effect; for as soon as the Dutch got control the slave-trade
was opened, although, as it appears, to no large extent. After the fall
of the Dutch Delaware came into English hands. Not until 1775 do we find
any legislation on the slave-trade. In that year the colony attempted
to prohibit the importation of slaves, but the governor vetoed the
bill.[43] Finally, in 1776 by the Constitution, and in 1787 by law,
importation and exportation were both prohibited.[44]


14. ~Restrictions in New Jersey.~[45] Although the freeholders of West
New Jersey declared, in 1676, that "all and every Person and Persons
Inhabiting the said Province, shall, as far as in us lies, be free from
Oppression and Slavery,"[46] yet Negro slaves are early found in the
colony.[47] The first restrictive measure was passed, after considerable
friction between the Council and the House, in 1713; it laid a duty of
Â£10, currency.[48] Governor Hunter explained to the Board of Trade that
the bill was "calculated to Encourage the Importation of white Servants
for the better Peopeling that Country."[49] How long this act continued
does not appear; probably, not long. No further legislation was enacted
until 1762 or 1763, when a prohibitive duty was laid on account of "the
inconvenience the Province is exposed to in lying open to the free
importation of Negros, when the Provinces on each side have laid duties
on them."[50] The Board of Trade declared that while they did not object
to "the Policy of imposing a reasonable duty," they could not assent to
this, and the act was disallowed.[51] The Act of 1769 evaded the
technical objection of the Board of Trade, and laid a duty of Â£15 on the
first purchasers of Negroes, because, as the act declared, "Duties on
the Importation of Negroes in several of the neighbouring Colonies
hath, on Experience, been found beneficial in the Introduction of sober,
industrious Foreigners."[52] In 1774 a bill which, according to the
report of the Council to Governor Morris, "plainly intended an entire
Prohibition of all Slaves being imported from foreign Parts," was thrown
out by the Council.[53] Importation was finally prohibited in 1786.[54]


15. ~General Character of these Restrictions.~ The main difference in
motive between the restrictions which the planting and the farming
colonies put on the African slave-trade, lay in the fact that the former
limited it mainly from fear of insurrection, the latter mainly because
it did not pay. Naturally, the latter motive worked itself out with much
less legislation than the former; for this reason, and because they held
a smaller number of slaves, most of these colonies have fewer actual
statutes than the Southern colonies. In Pennsylvania alone did this
general economic revolt against the trade acquire a distinct moral
tinge. Although even here the institution was naturally doomed, yet the
clear moral insight of the Quakers checked the trade much earlier than
would otherwise have happened. We may say, then, that the farming
colonies checked the slave-trade primarily from economic motives.


FOOTNOTES:

  [1] Smith, _Generall Historie of Virginia_ (1626 and 1632), p. 126.

  [2] Cf. Southey, _History of Brazil_.

  [3] De Laet, in O'Callaghan, _Voyages of the Slavers_, etc., p. viii.

  [4] See, e.g., Sainsbury, _Cal. State Papers; Col. Ser.,
      America and W. Indies, 1574-1660_, p. 279.

  [5] Cf. below, pp. 27, 32, notes; also _Freedoms_, XXX., in
      O'Callaghan, _Laws of New Netherland, 1638-74_ (ed. 1868), p.
      10; Brodhead, _History of New York_, I. 312.

  [6] The following is a summary of the legislation of the
      colony of New York; details will be found in Appendix A:--

        1709, Duty Act: Â£3 on Negroes not direct from Africa
               (Continued by the Acts of 1710, 1711).
        1711, Bill to lay further duty, lost in Council.
        1716, Duty Act:  5 oz. plate on Africans in colony ships.
                        10 oz. plate on Africans in other ships.
        1728,  "    "   40_s._ on Africans, Â£4 on colonial Negroes.
        1732,  "    "   40_s._ on Africans, Â£4 on colonial Negroes.
        1734,  "    "   (?)
        1753,  "    "   40_s._ on Africans, Â£4 on colonial Negroes.
                (This act was annually continued.)
       [1777, Vermont Constitution does not recognize slavery.]
        1785, Sale of slaves in State prohibited.
       [1786,  "         "   in Vermont prohibited.]
        1788,  "         "   in State prohibited.

  [7] O'Callaghan, _Laws of New Netherland, 1638-74_, pp. 31,
      348, etc. The colonists themselves were encouraged to trade,
      but the terms were not favorable enough: _Doc. rel. Col. Hist.
      New York_, I. 246; _Laws of New Netherland_, pp. 81-2, note,
      127. The colonists declared "that they are inclined to a
      foreign Trade, and especially to the Coast of _Africa_, ... in
      order to fetch thence Slaves": O'Callaghan, _Voyages of the
      Slavers_, etc., p. 172.

  [8] _Charter to William Penn_, etc. (1879), p. 12. First
      published on Long Island in 1664. Possibly Negro slaves were
      explicitly excepted. Cf. _Magazine of American History_, XI.
      411, and _N.Y. Hist. Soc. Coll._, I. 322.

  [9] _Acts of Assembly, 1691-1718_, pp. 97, 125, 134; _Doc.
      rel. Col. Hist. New York_, V. 178, 185, 293.

 [10] The Assembly attempted to raise the slave duty in 1711,
      but the Council objected (_Doc. rel. Col. Hist. New York_, V.
      292 ff.), although, as it seems, not on account of the slave
      duty in particular. Another act was passed between 1711 and
      1716, but its contents are not known (cf. title of the Act of
      1716). For the Act of 1716, see _Acts of Assembly, 1691-1718_,
      p. 224.

 [11] _Doc. rel. Col. Hist. New York_, VI. 37, 38.

 [12] _Doc. rel. Col. Hist. New York_, VI. 32-4.

 [13] _Ibid._, VII. 907. This act was annually renewed. The
      slave duty remained a chief source of revenue down to 1774.
      Cf. _Report of Governor Tryon_, in _Doc. rel. Col. Hist. New
      York_, VIII. 452.

 [14] _Laws of New York, 1785-88_ (ed. 1886), ch. 68, p. 121.
      Substantially the same act reappears in the revision of the
      laws of 1788: _Ibid._, ch. 40, p. 676.

 [15] The slave population of New York has been estimated as
      follows:--

      In 1698,   2,170. _Doc. rel. Col. Hist. New York_, IV. 420.
       " 1703,   2,258. _N.Y. Col. MSS._, XLVIII.; cited in Hough,
                          _N.Y. Census, 1855_, Introd.
       " 1712,   2,425. _Ibid._, LVII., LIX. (a partial census).
       " 1723,   6,171. _Doc. rel. Col. Hist. New York_, V. 702.
       " 1731,   7,743. _Ibid._, V. 929.
       " 1737,   8,941. _Ibid._, VI. 133.
       " 1746,   9,107. _Ibid._, VI. 392.
       " 1749,  10,692. _Ibid._, VI. 550.
       " 1756,  13,548. _London Doc._, XLIV. 123; cited in Hough,
                          as above.
       " 1771,  19,863. _Ibid._, XLIV. 144; cited in Hough, as above.
       " 1774,  21,149. _Ibid._,   "    "     "        "        "
       " 1786,  18,889. _Deeds in office Sec. of State_, XXII. 35.

      Total number of Africans imported from 1701 to 1726, 2,375,
      of whom 802 were from Africa: O'Callaghan, _Documentary
      History of New York_, I. 482.

 [16] Cf. below, Chapter XI.

 [17] _Vermont State Papers, 1779-86_, p. 244. The return of
      sixteen slaves in Vermont, by the first census, was an error:
      _New England Record_, XXIX. 249.

 [18] _Vermont State Papers_, p. 505.

 [19] The following is a summary of the legislation of the
      colony of Pennsylvania and Delaware; details will be found in
      Appendix A:--

      1705, Duty Act: (?).
      1710,   "   "   40_s._ (Disallowed).
      1712,   "   "   Â£20       "
      1712,   "   "   supplementary to the Act of 1710.
      1715,   "   "   Â£5 (Disallowed).
      1718,   "   "
      1720,   "   "   (?).
      1722,   "   "   (?).
      1725-6, "   "   Â£10.
      1726,   "   "
      1729,   "   "   Â£2.
      1761,   "   "   Â£10.
      1761,   "   "   (?).
      1768,   "   "   re-enactment of the Act of 1761.
      1773,   "   "   perpetual additional duty of Â£10; total, Â£20.
      1775, Bill to prohibit importation vetoed by the governor (Delaware).
      1775, Bill to prohibit importation vetoed by the governor.
      1778, Back duties on slaves ordered collected.
      1780, Act for the gradual abolition of slavery.
      1787, Act to prevent the exportation of slaves (Delaware).
      1788, Act to prevent the slave-trade.

 [20] From fac-simile copy, published at Germantown in 1880.
      Cf. Whittier's poem, "Pennsylvania Hall" (_Poetical Works_,
      Riverside ed., III. 62); and Proud, _History of Pennsylvania_
      (1797), I. 219.

 [21] From fac-simile copy, published at Germantown in 1880.

 [22] Bettle, _Notices of Negro Slavery_, in _Penn. Hist. Soc.
      Mem._ (1864), I. 383.

 [23] Cf. Bettle, _Notices of Negro Slavery, passim_.

 [24] Janney, _History of the Friends_, III. 315-7.

 [25] _Ibid._, III. 317.

 [26] Bettle, in _Penn. Hist. Soc. Mem._, I. 395.

 [27] _Penn. Col. Rec._ (1852), II. 530; Bettle, in _Penn.
      Hist. Soc. Mem._, I. 415.

 [28] _Laws of Pennsylvania, collected_, etc., 1714, p. 165;
      Bettle, in _Penn. Hist. Soc. Mem._, I. 387.

 [29] See preamble of the act.

 [30] The Pennsylvanians did not allow their laws to reach
      England until long after they were passed: _Penn. Archives_,
      I. 161-2; _Col. Rec._, II. 572-3. These acts were disallowed
      Feb. 20, 1713. Another duty act was passed in 1712,
      supplementary to the Act of 1710 (_Col. Rec._, II. 553). The
      contents are unknown.

 [31] _Acts and Laws of Pennsylvania_, 1715, p. 270; Chalmers,
      _Opinions_, II. 118. Before the disallowance was known, the
      act had been continued by the Act of 1718: Carey and Bioren,
      _Laws of Pennsylvania, 1700-1802_, I. 118; _Penn. Col. Rec._,
      III. 38.

 [32] Carey and Bioren, _Laws_, I. 165; _Penn. Col. Rec._, III.
      171; Bettle, in _Penn. Hist. Soc. Mem._, I. 389, note.

 [33] Carey and Bioren, _Laws_, I. 214; Bettle, in _Penn. Hist.
      Soc. Mem._, I. 388. Possibly there were two acts this year.

 [34] _Laws of Pennsylvania_ (ed. 1742), p. 354, ch. 287.
      Possibly some change in the currency made this change appear
      greater than it was.

 [35] Carey and Bioren, _Laws_, I. 371; _Acts of Assembly_ (ed.
      1782), p. 149; Dallas, _Laws_, I. 406, ch. 379. This act was
      renewed in 1768: Carey and Bioren, _Laws_, I. 451; _Penn. Col.
      Rec._, IX. 472, 637, 641.

 [36] _Penn. Col. Rec._, VIII. 576.

 [37] A large petition called for this bill. Much altercation
      ensued with the governor: Dallas, _Laws_, I. 671, ch. 692;
      _Penn. Col. Rec._, X. 77; Bettle, in _Penn. Hist. Soc. Mem._,
      I. 388-9.

 [38] Dallas, _Laws_, I. 782, ch. 810.

 [39] _Ibid._, I. 838, ch. 881.

 [40] There exist but few estimates of the number of slaves in
      this colony:--

      In 1721, 2,500-5,000. _Doc. rel. Col. Hist. New York_, V. 604.
       " 1754, 11,000. Bancroft, _Hist. of United States_ (1883),
                 II. 391.
       " 1760, very few." Burnaby, _Travels through N. Amer._ (2d ed.),
                 p. 81.
       " 1775, 2,000. _Penn. Archives_, IV 597.

 [41] Dallas, _Laws_, II. 586.

 [42] Cf. _Argonautica Gustaviana_, pp. 21-3; _Del. Hist. Soc.
      Papers_, III. 10; _Hazard's Register_, IV. 221, Â§Â§ 23, 24;
      _Hazard's Annals_, p. 372; Armstrong, _Record of Upland
      Court_, pp. 29-30, and notes.

 [43] Force, _American Archives_, 4th Ser., II. 128-9.

 [44] _Ibid._, 5th Ser., I. 1178; _Laws of Delaware, 1797_
      (Newcastle ed.), p. 884, ch. 145 b.

 [45] The following is a summary of the legislation of the
      colony of New Jersey; details will be found in Appendix A:--

        1713,     Duty Act: Â£10.
        1763 (?), Duty Act.
        1769,      "    "   Â£15.
        1774,      "    "   Â£5 on Africans, Â£10 on colonial Negroes.
        1786,  Importation prohibited.

 [46] Leaming and Spicer, _Grants, Concessions_, etc., p. 398.
      Probably this did not refer to Negroes at all.

 [47] Cf. Vincent, _History of Delaware_, I. 159, 381.

 [48] _Laws and Acts of New Jersey, 1703-17_ (ed. 1717), p. 43.

 [49] _N.J. Archives_, IV. 196. There was much difficulty in
      passing the bill: _Ibid._, XIII. 516-41.

 [50] _Ibid._, IX. 345-6. The exact provisions of the act I
      have not found.

 [51] _Ibid._, IX. 383, 447, 458. Chiefly because the duty was
      laid on the importer.

 [52] Allinson, _Acts of Assembly_, pp. 315-6.

 [53] _N.J. Archives_, VI. 222.

 [54] _Acts of the 10th General Assembly_, May 2, 1786. There
      are two estimates of the number of slaves in this colony:--

         In 1738,   3,981. _American Annals_, II. 127.
         "  1754,   4,606.        "      "         II. 143.

                    *       *       *       *       *




_Chapter IV_

THE TRADING COLONIES.

  16. Character of these Colonies.
  17. New England and the Slave-Trade.
  18. Restrictions in New Hampshire.
  19. Restrictions in Massachusetts.
  20. Restrictions in Rhode Island.
  21. Restrictions in Connecticut.
  22. General Character of these Restrictions.


16. ~Character of these Colonies.~ The rigorous climate of New England,
the character of her settlers, and their pronounced political views gave
slavery an even slighter basis here than in the Middle colonies. The
significance of New England in the African slave-trade does not
therefore lie in the fact that she early discountenanced the system of
slavery and stopped importation; but rather in the fact that her
citizens, being the traders of the New World, early took part in the
carrying slave-trade and furnished slaves to the other colonies. An
inquiry, therefore, into the efforts of the New England colonies to
suppress the slave-trade would fall naturally into two parts: first, and
chiefly, an investigation of the efforts to stop the participation of
citizens in the carrying slave-trade; secondly, an examination of the
efforts made to banish the slave-trade from New England soil.


17. ~New England and the Slave-Trade.~ Vessels from Massachusetts,[1]
Rhode Island,[2] Connecticut,[3] and, to a less extent, from New
Hampshire,[4] were early and largely engaged in the carrying
slave-trade. "We know," said Thomas Pemberton in 1795, "that a large
trade to Guinea was carried on for many years by the citizens of
Massachusetts Colony, who were the proprietors of the vessels and their
cargoes, out and home. Some of the slaves purchased in Guinea, and I
suppose the greatest part of them, were sold in the West Indies."[5] Dr.
John Eliot asserted that "it made a considerable branch of our
commerce.... It declined very little till the Revolution."[6] Yet the
trade of this colony was said not to equal that of Rhode Island. Newport
was the mart for slaves offered for sale in the North, and a point of
reshipment for all slaves. It was principally this trade that raised
Newport to her commercial importance in the eighteenth century.[7]
Connecticut, too, was an important slave-trader, sending large numbers
of horses and other commodities to the West Indies in exchange for
slaves, and selling the slaves in other colonies.

This trade formed a perfect circle. Owners of slavers carried slaves to
South Carolina, and brought home naval stores for their ship-building;
or to the West Indies, and brought home molasses; or to other colonies,
and brought home hogsheads. The molasses was made into the highly prized
New England rum, and shipped in these hogsheads to Africa for more
slaves.[8] Thus, the rum-distilling industry indicates to some extent
the activity of New England in the slave-trade. In May, 1752, one
Captain Freeman found so many slavers fitting out that, in spite of the
large importations of molasses, he could get no rum for his vessel.[9]
In Newport alone twenty-two stills were at one time running
continuously;[10] and Massachusetts annually distilled 15,000 hogsheads
of molasses into this "chief manufacture."[11]

Turning now to restrictive measures, we must first note the measures of
the slave-consuming colonies which tended to limit the trade. These
measures, however, came comparatively late, were enforced with varying
degrees of efficiency, and did not seriously affect the slave-trade
before the Revolution. The moral sentiment of New England put some check
upon the trade. Although in earlier times the most respectable people
took ventures in slave-trading voyages, yet there gradually arose a
moral sentiment which tended to make the business somewhat
disreputable.[12] In the line, however, of definite legal enactments to
stop New England citizens from carrying slaves from Africa to any place
in the world, there were, before the Revolution, none. Indeed, not until
the years 1787-1788 was slave-trading in itself an indictable offence in
any New England State.

The particular situation in each colony, and the efforts to restrict the
small importing slave-trade of New England, can best be studied in a
separate view of each community.


18. ~Restrictions in New Hampshire.~ The statistics of slavery in New
Hampshire show how weak an institution it always was in that colony.[13]
Consequently, when the usual instructions were sent to Governor
Wentworth as to the encouragement he must give to the slave-trade, the
House replied: "We have considered his Maj^{ties} Instruction relating
to an Impost on Negroes & Felons, to which this House answers, that
there never was any duties laid on either, by this Goverm^{t}, and so
few bro't in that it would not be worth the Publick notice, so as to
make an act concerning them."[14] This remained true for the whole
history of the colony. Importation was never stopped by actual
enactment, but was eventually declared contrary to the Constitution of
1784.[15] The participation of citizens in the trade appears never to
have been forbidden.


19. ~Restrictions in Massachusetts.~ The early Biblical codes of
Massachusetts confined slavery to "lawfull Captives taken in iust
warres, & such strangers as willingly selle themselves or are sold to
us."[16] The stern Puritanism of early days endeavored to carry this out
literally, and consequently when a certain Captain Smith, about 1640,
attacked an African village and brought some of the unoffending natives
home, he was promptly arrested. Eventually, the General Court ordered
the Negroes sent home at the colony's expense, "conceiving themselues
bound by y^e first oportunity to bear witnes against y^e haynos & crying
sinn of manstealing, as also to P'scribe such timely redresse for what
is past, & such a law for y^e future as may sufficiently deterr all
oth^{r}s belonging to us to have to do in such vile & most odious
courses, iustly abhored of all good & iust men."[17]

The temptation of trade slowly forced the colony from this high moral
ground. New England ships were early found in the West Indian
slave-trade, and the more the carrying trade developed, the more did the
profits of this branch of it attract Puritan captains. By the beginning
of the eighteenth century the slave-trade was openly recognized as
legitimate commerce; cargoes came regularly to Boston, and "The
merchants of Boston quoted negroes, like any other merchandise demanded
by their correspondents."[18] At the same time, the Puritan conscience
began to rebel against the growth of actual slavery on New England soil.
It was a much less violent wrenching of moral ideas of right and wrong
to allow Massachusetts men to carry slaves to South Carolina than to
allow cargoes to come into Boston, and become slaves in Massachusetts.
Early in the eighteenth century, therefore, opposition arose to the
further importation of Negroes, and in 1705 an act "for the Better
Preventing of a Spurious and Mixt Issue," laid a restrictive duty of Â£4
on all slaves imported.[19] One provision of this act plainly
illustrates the attitude of Massachusetts: like the acts of many of the
New England colonies, it allowed a rebate of the whole duty on
re-exportation. The harbors of New England were thus offered as a free
exchange-mart for slavers. All the duty acts of the Southern and Middle
colonies allowed a rebate of one-half or three-fourths of the duty on
the re-exportation of the slave, thus laying a small tax on even
temporary importation.

The Act of 1705 was evaded, but it was not amended until 1728, when the
penalty for evasion was raised to Â£100.[20] The act remained in force,
except possibly for one period of four years, until 1749. Meantime the
movement against importation grew. A bill "for preventing the
Importation of Slaves into this Province" was introduced in the
Legislature in 1767, but after strong opposition and disagreement
between House and Council it was dropped.[21] In 1771 the struggle was
renewed. A similar bill passed, but was vetoed by Governor
Hutchinson.[22] The imminent war and the discussions incident to it had
now more and more aroused public opinion, and there were repeated
attempts to gain executive consent to a prohibitory law. In 1774 such a
bill was twice passed, but never received assent.[23]

The new Revolutionary government first met the subject in the case of
two Negroes captured on the high seas, who were advertised for sale at
Salem. A resolution was introduced into the Legislature, directing the
release of the Negroes, and declaring "That the selling and enslaving
the human species is a direct violation of the natural rights alike
vested in all men by their Creator, and utterly inconsistent with the
avowed principles on which this, and the other United States, have
carried their struggle for liberty even to the last appeal." To this the
Council would not consent; and the resolution, as finally passed, merely
forbade the sale or ill-treatment of the Negroes.[24] Committees on the
slavery question were appointed in 1776 and 1777,[25] and although a
letter to Congress on the matter, and a bill for the abolition of
slavery were reported, no decisive action was taken.

All such efforts were finally discontinued, as the system was already
practically extinct in Massachusetts and the custom of importation had
nearly ceased. Slavery was eventually declared by judicial decision to
have been abolished.[26] The first step toward stopping the
participation of Massachusetts citizens in the slave-trade outside the
State was taken in 1785, when a committee of inquiry was appointed by
the Legislature.[27] No act was, however, passed until 1788, when
participation in the trade was prohibited, on pain of Â£50 forfeit for
every slave and Â£200 for every ship engaged.[28]


20. ~Restrictions in Rhode Island.~ In 1652 Rhode Island passed a law
designed to prohibit life slavery in the colony. It declared that
"Whereas, there is a common course practised amongst English men to buy
negers, to that end they may have them for service or slaves forever;
for the preventinge of such practices among us, let it be ordered, that
no blacke mankind or white being forced by covenant bond, or otherwise,
to serve any man or his assighnes longer than ten yeares, or untill they
come to bee twentie four yeares of age, if they bee taken in under
fourteen, from the time of their cominge within the liberties of this
Collonie. And at the end or terme of ten yeares to sett them free, as
the manner is with the English servants. And that man that will not let
them goe free, or shall sell them away elsewhere, to that end that they
may bee enslaved to others for a long time, hee or they shall forfeit to
the Collonie forty pounds."[29]

This law was for a time enforced,[30] but by the beginning of the
eighteenth century it had either been repealed or become a dead letter;
for the Act of 1708 recognized perpetual slavery, and laid an impost of
Â£3 on Negroes imported.[31] This duty was really a tax on the transport
trade, and produced a steady income for twenty years.[32] From the year
1700 on, the citizens of this State engaged more and more in the
carrying trade, until Rhode Island became the greatest slave-trader in
America. Although she did not import many slaves for her own use, she
became the clearing-house for the trade of other colonies. Governor
Cranston, as early as 1708, reported that between 1698 and 1708 one
hundred and three vessels were built in the State, all of which were
trading to the West Indies and the Southern colonies.[33] They took out
lumber and brought back molasses, in most cases making a slave voyage in
between. From this, the trade grew. Samuel Hopkins, about 1770, was
shocked at the state of the trade: more than thirty distilleries were
running in the colony, and one hundred and fifty vessels were in the
slave-trade.[34] "Rhode Island," said he, "has been more deeply
interested in the slave-trade, and has enslaved more Africans than any
other colony in New England." Later, in 1787, he wrote: "The inhabitants
of Rhode Island, especially those of Newport, have had by far the
greater share in this traffic, of all these United States. This trade in
human species has been the first wheel of commerce in Newport, on which
every other movement in business has chiefly depended. That town has
been built up, and flourished in times past, at the expense of the
blood, the liberty, and happiness of the poor Africans; and the
inhabitants have lived on this, and by it have gotten most of their
wealth and riches."[35]

The Act of 1708 was poorly enforced. The "good intentions" of its
framers "were wholly frustrated" by the clandestine "hiding and
conveying said negroes out of the town [Newport] into the country, where
they lie concealed."[36] The act was accordingly strengthened by the
Acts of 1712 and 1715, and made to apply to importations by land as well
as by sea.[37] The Act of 1715, however, favored the trade by admitting
African Negroes free of duty. The chaotic state of Rhode Island did not
allow England often to review her legislation; but as soon as the Act of
1712 came to notice it was disallowed, and accordingly repealed in
1732.[38] Whether the Act of 1715 remained, or whether any other duty
act was passed, is not clear.

While the foreign trade was flourishing, the influence of the Friends
and of other causes eventually led to a movement against slavery as a
local institution. Abolition societies multiplied, and in 1770 an
abolition bill was ordered by the Assembly, but it was never passed.[39]
Four years later the city of Providence resolved that "as personal
liberty is an essential part of the natural rights of mankind," the
importation of slaves and the system of slavery should cease in the
colony.[40] This movement finally resulted, in 1774, in an act
"prohibiting the importation of Negroes into this Colony,"--a law which
curiously illustrated the attitude of Rhode Island toward the
slave-trade. The preamble of the act declared: "Whereas, the inhabitants
of America are generally engaged in the preservation of their own rights
and liberties, among which, that of personal freedom must be considered
as the greatest; as those who are desirous of enjoying all the
advantages of liberty themselves, should be willing to extend personal
liberty to others;--Therefore," etc. The statute then proceeded to enact
"that for the future, no negro or mulatto slave shall be brought into
this colony; and in case any slave shall hereafter be brought in, he or
she shall be, and are hereby, rendered immediately free...." The logical
ending of such an act would have been a clause prohibiting the
participation of Rhode Island citizens in the slave-trade. Not only was
such a clause omitted, but the following was inserted instead:
"Provided, also, that nothing in this act shall extend, or be deemed to
extend, to any negro or mulatto slave brought from the coast of Africa,
into the West Indies, on board any vessel belonging to this colony, and
which negro or mulatto slave could not be disposed of in the West
Indies, but shall be brought into this colony. Provided, that the owner
of such negro or mulatto slave give bond ... that such negro or mulatto
slave shall be exported out of the colony, within one year from the date
of such bond; if such negro or mulatto be alive, and in a condition to
be removed."[41]

In 1779 an act to prevent the sale of slaves out of the State was
passed,[42] and in 1784, an act gradually to abolish slavery.[43] Not
until 1787 did an act pass to forbid participation in the slave-trade.
This law laid a penalty of Â£100 for every slave transported and Â£1000
for every vessel so engaged.[44]


21. ~Restrictions in Connecticut.~ Connecticut, in common with the other
colonies of this section, had a trade for many years with the West
Indian slave markets; and though this trade was much smaller than that
of the neighboring colonies, yet many of her citizens were engaged in
it. A map of Middletown at the time of the Revolution gives, among one
hundred families, three slave captains and "three notables" designated
as "slave-dealers."[45]

The actual importation was small,[46] and almost entirely unrestricted
before the Revolution, save by a few light, general duty acts. In 1774
the further importation of slaves was prohibited, because "the increase
of slaves in this Colony is injurious to the poor and inconvenient." The
law prohibited importation under any pretext by a penalty of Â£100 per
slave.[47] This was re-enacted in 1784, and provisions were made for the
abolition of slavery.[48] In 1788 participation in the trade was
forbidden, and the penalty placed at Â£50 for each slave and Â£500 for
each ship engaged.[49]


22. ~General Character of these Restrictions.~ Enough has already been
said to show, in the main, the character of the opposition to the
slave-trade in New England. The system of slavery had, on this soil and
amid these surroundings, no economic justification, and the small number
of Negroes here furnished no political arguments against them. The
opposition to the importation was therefore from the first based solely
on moral grounds, with some social arguments. As to the carrying trade,
however, the case was different. Here, too, a feeble moral opposition
was early aroused, but it was swept away by the immense economic
advantages of the slave traffic to a thrifty seafaring community of
traders. This trade no moral suasion, not even the strong "Liberty" cry
of the Revolution, was able wholly to suppress, until the closing of the
West Indian and Southern markets cut off the demand for slaves.


FOOTNOTES:

  [1] Cf. Weeden, _Economic and Social History of New England_,
      II. 449-72; G.H. Moore, _Slavery in Massachusetts_; Charles
      Deane, _Connection of Massachusetts with Slavery_.

  [2] Cf. _American Historical Record_, I. 311, 338.

  [3] Cf. W.C. Fowler, _Local Law in Massachusetts and
      Connecticut_, etc., pp. 122-6.

  [4] _Ibid._, p. 124.

  [5] Deane, _Letters and Documents relating to Slavery in
      Massachusetts_, in _Mass. Hist. Soc. Coll._, 5th Ser., III.
      392.

  [6] _Ibid._, III. 382.

  [7] Weeden, _Economic and Social History of New England_, II.
      454.

  [8] A typical voyage is that of the brigantine "Sanderson" of
      Newport. She was fitted out in March, 1752, and carried,
      beside the captain, two mates and six men, and a cargo of
      8,220 gallons of rum, together with "African" iron, flour,
      pots, tar, sugar, and provisions, shackles, shirts, and water.
      Proceeding to Africa, the captain after some difficulty sold
      his cargo for slaves, and in April, 1753, he is expected in
      Barbadoes, as the consignees write. They also state that
      slaves are selling at Â£33 to Â£56 per head in lots. After a
      stormy and dangerous voyage, Captain Lindsay arrived, June 17,
      1753, with fifty-six slaves, "all in helth & fatt." He also
      had 40 oz. of gold dust, and 8 or 9 cwt. of pepper. The net
      proceeds of the sale of all this was Â£1,324 3_d._ The captain
      then took on board 55 hhd. of molasses and 3 hhd. 27 bbl. of
      sugar, amounting to Â£911 77_s._ 2Â½_d._, received bills on
      Liverpool for the balance, and returned in safety to Rhode
      Island. He had done so well that he was immediately given a
      new ship and sent to Africa again. _American Historical
      Record_, I. 315-9, 338-42.

  [9] _Ibid._, I. 316.

 [10] _American Historical Record_, I. 317.

 [11] _Ibid._, I. 344; cf. Weeden, _Economic and Social History
      of New England_, II. 459.

 [12] Cf. _New England Register_, XXXI. 75-6, letter of John
      Saffin _et al._ to Welstead. Cf. also Sewall, _Protest_, etc.

 [13] The number of slaves in New Hampshire has been estimated
      as follows:

        In 1730,    200.   _N.H. Hist. Soc. Coll._, I. 229.
         " 1767,    633.   _Granite Monthly_, IV. 108.
         " 1773,    681.   _Ibid._
         " 1773,    674.   _N.H. Province Papers_, X. 636.
         " 1775,    479.   _Granite Monthly_, IV. 108.
         " 1790,    158.   _Ibid._

 [14] _N.H. Province Papers_, IV. 617.

 [15] _Granite Monthly_, VI. 377; Poore, _Federal and State
      Constitutions_, pp. 1280-1.

 [16] Cf. _The Body of Liberties_, Â§ 91, in Whitmore,
      _Bibliographical Sketch of the Laws of the Massachusetts
      Colony_, published at Boston in 1890.

 [17] _Mass. Col. Rec._, II. 168, 176; III. 46, 49, 84.

 [18] Weeden, _Economic and Social History of New England_, II.
      456.

 [19] _Mass. Province Laws, 1705-6_, ch. 10.

 [20] _Ibid._, _1728-9_, ch. 16; _1738-9_, ch. 27.

 [21] For petitions of towns, cf. Felt, _Annals of Salem_
      (1849), II. 416; _Boston Town Records, 1758-69_, p. 183. Cf.
      also Otis's anti-slavery speech in 1761; John Adams, _Works_,
      X. 315. For proceedings, see _House Journal_, 1767, pp. 353,
      358, 387, 390, 393, 408, 409-10, 411, 420. Cf. Samuel Dexter's
      answer to Dr. Belknap's inquiry, Feb. 23, 1795, in Deane
      (_Mass. Hist. Soc. Coll._, 5th Ser., III. 385). A committee on
      slave importation was appointed in 1764. Cf. _House Journal_,
      1763-64, p. 170.

 [22] _House Journal_, 1771, pp. 211, 215, 219, 228, 234, 236,
      240, 242-3; Moore, _Slavery in Massachusetts_, pp. 131-2.

 [23] Felt, _Annals of Salem_ (1849), II. 416-7; Swan,
      _Dissuasion to Great Britain_, etc. (1773), p. x; Washburn,
      _Historical Sketches of Leicester, Mass._, pp. 442-3; Freeman,
      _History of Cape Cod_, II. 114; Deane, in _Mass. Hist. Soc.
      Coll._, 5th Ser., III. 432; Moore, _Slavery in Massachusetts_,
      pp. 135-40; Williams, _History of the Negro Race in America_,
      I. 234-6; _House Journal_, March, 1774, pp. 224, 226, 237,
      etc.; June, 1774, pp. 27, 41, etc. For a copy of the bill, see
      Moore.

 [24] _Mass. Hist. Soc. Proceedings, 1855-58_, p. 196; Force,
      _American Archives_, 5th Ser., II. 769; _House Journal_, 1776,
      pp. 105-9; _General Court Records_, March 13, 1776, etc., pp.
      581-9; Moore, _Slavery in Massachusetts_, pp. 149-54. Cf.
      Moore, pp. 163-76.

 [25] Moore, _Slavery in Massachusetts_, pp. 148-9, 181-5.

 [26] Washburn, _Extinction of Slavery in Massachusetts_;
      Haynes, _Struggle for the Constitution in Massachusetts_; La
      Rochefoucauld, _Travels through the United States_, II. 166.

 [27] Moore, _Slavery in Massachusetts_, p. 225.

 [28] _Perpetual Laws of Massachusetts, 1780-89_, p. 235. The
      number of slaves in Massachusetts has been estimated as
      follows:--

      In 1676,     200. Randolph's _Report_, in _Hutchinson's Coll.
                     of Papers_, p. 485.
      "  1680,     120. Deane, _Connection of Mass. with Slavery_,
                     p. 28 ff.
      "  1708,     550. _Ibid._; Moore, _Slavery in Mass._, p. 50.
      "  1720,   2,000. _Ibid._
      "  1735,   2,600. Deane, _Connection of Mass. with Slavery_,
                     p. 28 ff.
      "  1749,   3,000. _Ibid._
      "  1754,   4,489. _Ibid._
      "  1763,   5,000. _Ibid._
      "  1764-5, 5,779. _Ibid._
      "  1776,   5,249. _Ibid._
      "  1784,   4,377. Moore, _Slavery in Mass._, p. 51.
      "  1786,   4,371. _Ibid._
      "  1790,   6,001. _Ibid._

 [29] _R.I. Col. Rec._, I. 240.

 [30] Cf. letter written in 1681: _New England Register_, XXXI.
      75-6. Cf. also Arnold, _History of Rhode Island_, I. 240.

 [31] The text of this act is lost (_Col. Rec._, IV. 34;
      Arnold, _History of Rhode Island_, II. 31). The Acts of Rhode
      Island were not well preserved, the first being published in
      Boston in 1719. Perhaps other whole acts are lost.

 [32] E.g., it was expended to pave the streets of Newport, to
      build bridges, etc.: _R.I. Col. Rec._, IV. 191-3, 225.

 [33] _Ibid._, IV. 55-60.

 [34] Patten, _Reminiscences of Samuel Hopkins_ (1843), p. 80.

 [35] Hopkins, _Works_ (1854), II. 615.

 [36] Preamble of the Act of 1712.

 [37] _R.I. Col. Rec._, IV. 131-5, 138, 143, 191-3.

 [38] _R.I. Col. Rec._, IV. 471.

 [39] Arnold, _History of Rhode Island_, II. 304, 321, 337. For
      a probable copy of the bill, see _Narragansett Historical
      Register_, II. 299.

 [40] A man dying intestate left slaves, who became thus the
      property of the city; they were freed, and the town made the
      above resolve, May 17, 1774, in town meeting: Staples, _Annals
      of Providence_ (1843), p. 236.

 [41] _R.I. Col. Rec._, VII. 251-2.

 [42] _Bartlett's Index_, p. 329; Arnold, _History of Rhode
      Island_, II. 444; _R.I. Col. Rec._, VIII. 618.

 [43] _R.I. Col. Rec._, X. 7-8; Arnold, _History of Rhode
      Island_, II. 506.

 [44] _Bartlett's Index_, p. 333; _Narragansett Historical
      Register_, II. 298-9. The number of slaves in Rhode Island has
      been estimated as follows:--

      In 1708,    426. _R.I. Col. Rec._, IV. 59.
       " 1730,  1,648. _R.I. Hist. Tracts_, No. 19, pt. 2, p. 99.
       " 1749,  3,077. Williams, _History of the Negro Race in America_,
                         I. 281.
       " 1756,  4,697. _Ibid._
       " 1774,  3,761. _R.I. Col. Rec._, VII. 253.

 [45] Fowler, _Local Law_, etc., p. 124.

 [46] The number of slaves in Connecticut has been estimated as
      follows:--

      In 1680,     30.  _Conn. Col. Rec._, III. 298.
       " 1730,    700.  Williams, _History of the Negro Race in America_,
                          I. 259.
       " 1756,  3,636.  Fowler, _Local Law_, etc., p. 140.
       " 1762,  4,590.  Williams, _History of the Negro Race in America_,
                          I. 260.
       " 1774,  6,562.  Fowler, _Local Law_, etc., p. 140.
       " 1782,  6,281.  Fowler, _Local Law_, etc., p. 140.
       " 1800,  5,281.  _Ibid._, p. 141.

 [47] _Conn. Col. Rec._, XIV 329. Fowler (pp. 125-6) says that
      the law was passed in 1769, as does Sanford (p. 252). I find
      no proof of this. There was in Connecticut the same Biblical
      legislation on the trade as in Massachusetts. Cf. _Laws of
      Connecticut_ (repr. 1865), p. 9; also _Col. Rec._, I. 77. For
      general duty acts, see _Col. Rec._, V 405; VIII. 22; IX. 283;
      XIII. 72, 125.

 [48] _Acts and Laws of Connecticut_ (ed. 1784), pp. 233-4.

 [49] _Ibid._, pp. 368, 369, 388.

                    *       *       *       *       *




_Chapter V_

THE PERIOD OF THE REVOLUTION. 1774-1787.

  23. The Situation in 1774.
  24. The Condition of the Slave-Trade.
  25. The Slave-Trade and the "Association."
  26. The Action of the Colonies.
  27. The Action of the Continental Congress.
  28. Reception of the Slave-Trade Resolution.
  29. Results of the Resolution.
  30. The Slave-Trade and Public Opinion after the War.
  31. The Action of the Confederation.


23. ~The Situation in 1774.~ In the individual efforts of the various
colonies to suppress the African slave-trade there may be traced certain
general movements. First, from 1638 to 1664, there was a tendency to
take a high moral stand against the traffic. This is illustrated in the
laws of New England, in the plans for the settlement of Delaware and,
later, that of Georgia, and in the protest of the German Friends. The
second period, from about 1664 to 1760, has no general unity, but is
marked by statutes laying duties varying in design from encouragement to
absolute prohibition, by some cases of moral opposition, and by the slow
but steady growth of a spirit unfavorable to the long continuance of the
trade. The last colonial period, from about 1760 to 1787, is one of
pronounced effort to regulate, limit, or totally prohibit the traffic.
Beside these general movements, there are many waves of legislation,
easily distinguishable, which rolled over several or all of the colonies
at various times, such as the series of high duties following the
Assiento, and the acts inspired by various Negro "plots."

Notwithstanding this, the laws of the colonies before 1774 had no
national unity, the peculiar circumstances of each colony determining
its legislation. With the outbreak of the Revolution came unison in
action with regard to the slave-trade, as with regard to other matters,
which may justly be called national. It was, of course, a critical
period,--a period when, in the rapid upheaval of a few years, the
complicated and diverse forces of decades meet, combine, act, and react,
until the resultant seems almost the work of chance. In the settlement
of the fate of slavery and the slave-trade, however, the real crisis
came in the calm that succeeded the storm, in that day when, in the
opinion of most men, the question seemed already settled. And indeed it
needed an exceptionally clear and discerning mind, in 1787, to deny that
slavery and the slave-trade in the United States of America were doomed
to early annihilation. It seemed certainly a legitimate deduction from
the history of the preceding century to conclude that, as the system had
risen, flourished, and fallen in Massachusetts, New York, and
Pennsylvania, and as South Carolina, Virginia, and Maryland were
apparently following in the same legislative path, the next generation
would in all probability witness the last throes of the system on our
soil.

To be sure, the problem had its uncertain quantities. The motives of the
law-makers in South Carolina and Pennsylvania were dangerously
different; the century of industrial expansion was slowly dawning and
awakening that vast economic revolution in which American slavery was to
play so prominent and fatal a rÃ´le; and, finally, there were already in
the South faint signs of a changing moral attitude toward slavery, which
would no longer regard the system as a temporary makeshift, but rather
as a permanent though perhaps unfortunate necessity. With regard to the
slave-trade, however, there appeared to be substantial unity of opinion;
and there were, in 1787, few things to indicate that a cargo of five
hundred African slaves would openly be landed in Georgia in 1860.


24. ~The Condition of the Slave-Trade.~ In 1760 England, the chief
slave-trading nation, was sending on an average to Africa 163 ships
annually, with a tonnage of 18,000 tons, carrying exports to the value
of Â£163,818. Only about twenty of these ships regularly returned to
England. Most of them carried slaves to the West Indies, and returned
laden with sugar and other products. Thus may be formed some idea of the
size and importance of the slave-trade at that time, although for a
complete view we must add to this the trade under the French,
Portuguese, Dutch, and Americans. The trade fell off somewhat toward
1770, but was flourishing again when the Revolution brought a sharp and
serious check upon it, bringing down the number of English slavers,
clearing, from 167 in 1774 to 28 in 1779, and the tonnage from 17,218 to
3,475 tons. After the war the trade gradually recovered, and by 1786 had
reached nearly its former extent. In 1783 the British West Indies
received 16,208 Negroes from Africa, and by 1787 the importation had
increased to 21,023. In this latter year it was estimated that the
British were taking annually from Africa 38,000 slaves; the French,
20,000; the Portuguese, 10,000; the Dutch and Danes, 6,000; a total of
74,000. Manchester alone sent Â£180,000 annually in goods to Africa in
exchange for Negroes.[1]


25. ~The Slave-Trade and the "Association."~ At the outbreak of the
Revolution six main reasons, some of which were old and of slow growth,
others peculiar to the abnormal situation of that time, led to concerted
action against the slave-trade. The first reason was the economic
failure of slavery in the Middle and Eastern colonies; this gave rise to
the presumption that like failure awaited the institution in the South.
Secondly, the new philosophy of "Freedom" and the "Rights of man," which
formed the corner-stone of the Revolution, made the dullest realize
that, at the very least, the slave-trade and a struggle for "liberty"
were not consistent. Thirdly, the old fear of slave insurrections, which
had long played so prominent a part in legislation, now gained new power
from the imminence of war and from the well-founded fear that the
British might incite servile uprisings. Fourthly, nearly all the
American slave markets were, in 1774-1775, overstocked with slaves, and
consequently many of the strongest partisans of the system were "bulls"
on the market, and desired to raise the value of their slaves by at
least a temporary stoppage of the trade. Fifthly, since the vested
interests of the slave-trading merchants were liable to be swept away by
the opening of hostilities, and since the price of slaves was low,[2]
there was from this quarter little active opposition to a cessation of
the trade for a season. Finally, it was long a favorite belief of the
supporters of the Revolution that, as English exploitation of colonial
resources had caused the quarrel, the best weapon to bring England to
terms was the economic expedient of stopping all commercial intercourse
with her. Since, then, the slave-trade had ever formed an important part
of her colonial traffic, it was one of the first branches of commerce
which occurred to the colonists as especially suited to their ends.[3]

Such were the complicated moral, political, and economic motives which
underlay the first national action against the slave-trade. This action
was taken by the "Association," a union of the colonies entered into to
enforce the policy of stopping commercial intercourse with England. The
movement was not a great moral protest against an iniquitous traffic;
although it had undoubtedly a strong moral backing, it was primarily a
temporary war measure.


26. ~The Action of the Colonies.~ The earlier and largely abortive
attempts to form non-intercourse associations generally did not mention
slaves specifically, although the Virginia House of Burgesses, May 11,
1769, recommended to merchants and traders, among other things, to
agree, "That they will not import any slaves, or purchase any imported
after the first day of November next, until the said acts are
repealed."[4] Later, in 1774, when a Faneuil Hall meeting started the
first successful national attempt at non-intercourse, the slave-trade,
being at the time especially flourishing, received more attention. Even
then slaves were specifically mentioned in the resolutions of but three
States. Rhode Island recommended a stoppage of "all trade with Great
Britain, Ireland, Africa and the West Indies."[5] North Carolina, in
August, 1774, resolved in convention "That we will not import any slave
or slaves, or purchase any slave or slaves, imported or brought into
this Province by others, from any part of the world, after the first day
of _November_ next."[6] Virginia gave the slave-trade especial
prominence, and was in reality the leading spirit to force her views on
the Continental Congress. The county conventions of that colony first
took up the subject. Fairfax County thought "that during our present
difficulties and distress, no slaves ought to be imported," and said:
"We take this opportunity of declaring our most earnest wishes to see an
entire stop forever put to such a wicked, cruel, and unnatural
trade."[7] Prince George and Nansemond Counties resolved "That the
_African_ trade is injurious to this Colony, obstructs the population of
it by freemen, prevents manufacturers and other useful emigrants from
_Europe_ from settling amongst us, and occasions an annual increase of
the balance of trade against this Colony."[8] The Virginia colonial
convention, August, 1774, also declared: "We will neither ourselves
import, nor purchase any slave or slaves imported by any other person,
after the first day of _November_ next, either from _Africa_, the _West
Indies_, or any other place."[9]

In South Carolina, at the convention July 6, 1774, decided opposition to
the non-importation scheme was manifested, though how much this was due
to the slave-trade interest is not certain. Many of the delegates wished
at least to limit the powers of their representatives, and the
Charleston Chamber of Commerce flatly opposed the plan of an
"Association." Finally, however, delegates with full powers were sent to
Congress. The arguments leading to this step were not in all cases on
the score of patriotism; a Charleston manifesto argued: "The planters
are greatly in arrears to the merchants; a stoppage of importation would
give them all an opportunity to extricate themselves from debt. The
merchants would have time to settle their accounts, and be ready with
the return of liberty to renew trade."[10]


27. ~The Action of the Continental Congress.~ The first Continental
Congress met September 5, 1774, and on September 22 recommended
merchants to send no more orders for foreign goods.[11] On September 27
"Mr. Lee made a motion for a non-importation," and it was unanimously
resolved to import no goods from Great Britain after December 1,
1774.[12] Afterward, Ireland and the West Indies were also included, and
a committee consisting of Low of New York, Mifflin of Pennsylvania, Lee
of Virginia, and Johnson of Connecticut were appointed "to bring in a
Plan for carrying into Effect the Non-importation, Non-consumption, and
Non-exportation resolved on."[13] The next move was to instruct this
committee to include in the proscribed articles, among other things,
"Molasses, Coffee or Piemento from the _British_ Plantations or from
_Dominica_,"--a motion which cut deep into the slave-trade circle of
commerce, and aroused some opposition. "Will, can, the people bear a
total interruption of the West India trade?" asked Low of New York; "Can
they live without rum, sugar, and molasses? Will not this impatience and
vexation defeat the measure?"[14]

The committee finally reported, October 12, 1774, and after three days'
discussion and amendment the proposal passed. This document, after a
recital of grievances, declared that, in the opinion of the colonists, a
non-importation agreement would best secure redress; goods from Great
Britain, Ireland, the East and West Indies, and Dominica were excluded;
and it was resolved that "We will neither import, nor purchase any Slave
imported after the First Day of _December_ next; after which Time, we
will wholly discontinue the Slave Trade, and will neither be concerned
in it ourselves, nor will we hire our Vessels, nor sell our Commodities
or Manufactures to those who are concerned in it."[15]

Strong and straightforward as this resolution was, time unfortunately
proved that it meant very little. Two years later, in this same
Congress, a decided opposition was manifested to branding the
slave-trade as inhuman, and it was thirteen years before South Carolina
stopped the slave-trade or Massachusetts prohibited her citizens from
engaging in it. The passing of so strong a resolution must be explained
by the motives before given, by the character of the drafting
committee, by the desire of America in this crisis to appear well
before the world, and by the natural moral enthusiasm aroused by the
imminence of a great national struggle.


28. ~Reception of the Slave-Trade Resolution.~ The unanimity with which
the colonists received this "Association" is not perhaps as remarkable
as the almost entire absence of comment on the radical slave-trade
clause. A Connecticut town-meeting in December, 1774, noticed "with
singular pleasure ... the second Article of the Association, in which it
is agreed to import no more Negro Slaves."[16] This comment appears to
have been almost the only one. There were in various places some
evidences of disapproval; but only in the State of Georgia was this
widespread and determined, and based mainly on the slave-trade
clause.[17] This opposition delayed the ratification meeting until
January 18, 1775, and then delegates from but five of the twelve
parishes appeared, and many of these had strong instructions against the
approval of the plan. Before this meeting could act, the governor
adjourned it, on the ground that it did not represent the province. Some
of the delegates signed an agreement, one article of which promised to
stop the importation of slaves March 15, 1775, i.e., four months later
than the national "Association" had directed. This was not, of course,
binding on the province; and although a town like Darien might declare
"our disapprobation and abhorrence of the unnatural practice of Slavery
in _America_"[18] yet the powerful influence of Savannah was "not likely
soon to give matters a favourable turn. The importers were mostly
against any interruption, and the consumers very much divided."[19] Thus
the efforts of this Assembly failed, their resolutions being almost
unknown, and, as a gentleman writes, "I hope for the honour of the
Province ever will remain so."[20] The delegates to the Continental
Congress selected by this rump assembly refused to take their seats.
Meantime South Carolina stopped trade with Georgia, because it "hath not
acceded to the Continental Association,"[21] and the single Georgia
parish of St. Johns appealed to the second Continental Congress to
except it from the general boycott of the colony. This county had
already resolved not to "purchase any Slave imported at _Savannah_
(large Numbers of which we understand are there expected) till the Sense
of Congress shall be made known to us."[22]

May 17, 1775, Congress resolved unanimously "That all exportations to
_Quebec_, _Nova-Scotia_, the Island of _St. John's_, _Newfoundland_,
_Georgia_, except the Parish of _St. John's_, and to _East_ and _West
Florida_, immediately cease."[23] These measures brought the refractory
colony to terms, and the Provincial Congress, July 4, 1775, finally
adopted the "Association," and resolved, among other things, "That we
will neither import or purchase any Slave imported from Africa, or
elsewhere, after this day."[24]

The non-importation agreement was in the beginning, at least, well
enforced by the voluntary action of the loosely federated nation. The
slave-trade clause seems in most States to have been observed with the
others. In South Carolina "a cargo of near three hundred slaves was sent
out of the Colony by the consignee, as being interdicted by the second
article of the Association."[25] In Virginia the vigilance committee of
Norfolk "hold up for your just indignation Mr. _John Brown_, Merchant,
of this place," who has several times imported slaves from Jamaica; and
he is thus publicly censured "to the end that all such foes to the
rights of _British America_ may be publickly known ... as the enemies of
_American_ Liberty, and that every person may henceforth break off all
dealings with him."[26]


29. ~Results of the Resolution.~ The strain of war at last proved too
much for this voluntary blockade, and after some hesitancy Congress,
April 3, 1776, resolved to allow the importation of articles not the
growth or manufacture of Great Britain, except tea. They also voted
"That no slaves be imported into any of the thirteen United
Colonies."[27] This marks a noticeable change of attitude from the
strong words of two years previous: the former was a definitive promise;
this is a temporary resolve, which probably represented public opinion
much better than the former. On the whole, the conclusion is inevitably
forced on the student of this first national movement against the
slave-trade, that its influence on the trade was but temporary and
insignificant, and that at the end of the experiment the outlook for the
final suppression of the trade was little brighter than before. The
whole movement served as a sort of social test of the power and
importance of the slave-trade, which proved to be far more powerful than
the platitudes of many of the Revolutionists had assumed.

The effect of the movement on the slave-trade in general was to begin,
possibly a little earlier than otherwise would have been the case, that
temporary breaking up of the trade which the war naturally caused.
"There was a time, during the late war," says Clarkson, "when the slave
trade may be considered as having been nearly abolished."[28] The prices
of slaves rose correspondingly high, so that smugglers made
fortunes.[29] It is stated that in the years 1772-1778 slave merchants
of Liverpool failed for the sum of Â£710,000.[30] All this, of course,
might have resulted from the war, without the "Association;" but in the
long run the "Association" aided in frustrating the very designs which
the framers of the first resolve had in mind; for the temporary stoppage
in the end created an extraordinary demand for slaves, and led to a
slave-trade after the war nearly as large as that before.


30. ~The Slave-Trade and Public Opinion after the War.~ The Declaration
of Independence showed a significant drift of public opinion from the
firm stand taken in the "Association" resolutions. The clique of
political philosophers to which Jefferson belonged never imagined the
continued existence of the country with slavery. It is well known that
the first draft of the Declaration contained a severe arraignment of
Great Britain as the real promoter of slavery and the slave-trade in
America. In it the king was charged with waging "cruel war against human
nature itself, violating its most sacred rights of life and liberty in
the persons of a distant people who never offended him, captivating and
carrying them into slavery in another hemisphere, or to incur miserable
death in their transportation thither. This piratical warfare, the
opprobrium of _infidel_ powers, is the warfare of the _Christian_ king
of Great Britain. Determined to keep open a market where _men_ should be
bought and sold, he has prostituted his negative for suppressing every
legislative attempt to prohibit or to restrain this execrable commerce.
And that this assemblage of horrors might want no fact of distinguished
die, he is now exciting those very people to rise in arms among us, and
to purchase that liberty of which he has deprived them, by murdering the
people on whom he also obtruded them: thus paying off former crimes
committed against the _liberties_ of one people with crimes which he
urges them to commit against the _lives_ of another."[31]

To this radical and not strictly truthful statement, even the large
influence of the Virginia leaders could not gain the assent of the
delegates in Congress. The afflatus of 1774 was rapidly subsiding, and
changing economic conditions had already led many to look forward to a
day when the slave-trade could successfully be reopened. More important
than this, the nation as a whole was even less inclined now than in 1774
to denounce the slave-trade uncompromisingly. Jefferson himself says
that this clause "was struck out in complaisance to South Carolina and
Georgia, who had never attempted to restrain the importation of slaves,
and who, on the contrary, still wished to continue it. Our northern
brethren also, I believe," said he, "felt a little tender under those
censures; for though their people had very few slaves themselves, yet
they had been pretty considerable carriers of them to others."[32]

As the war slowly dragged itself to a close, it became increasingly
evident that a firm moral stand against slavery and the slave-trade was
not a probability. The reaction which naturally follows a period of
prolonged and exhausting strife for high political principles now set
in. The economic forces of the country, which had suffered most, sought
to recover and rearrange themselves; and all the selfish motives that
impelled a bankrupt nation to seek to gain its daily bread did not long
hesitate to demand a reopening of the profitable African slave-trade.
This demand was especially urgent from the fact that the slaves, by
pillage, flight, and actual fighting, had become so reduced in numbers
during the war that an urgent demand for more laborers was felt in the
South.

Nevertheless, the revival of the trade was naturally a matter of some
difficulty, as the West India circuit had been cut off, leaving no
resort except to contraband traffic and the direct African trade. The
English slave-trade after the peace "returned to its former state," and
was by 1784 sending 20,000 slaves annually to the West Indies.[33] Just
how large the trade to the continent was at this time there are few
means of ascertaining; it is certain that there was a general reopening
of the trade in the Carolinas and Georgia, and that the New England
traders participated in it. This traffic undoubtedly reached
considerable proportions; and through the direct African trade and the
illicit West India trade many thousands of Negroes came into the United
States during the years 1783-1787.[34]

Meantime there was slowly arising a significant divergence of opinion on
the subject. Probably the whole country still regarded both slavery and
the slave-trade as temporary; but the Middle States expected to see the
abolition of both within a generation, while the South scarcely thought
it probable to prohibit even the slave-trade in that short time. Such a
difference might, in all probability, have been satisfactorily adjusted,
if both parties had recognized the real gravity of the matter. As it
was, both regarded it as a problem of secondary importance, to be solved
after many other more pressing ones had been disposed of. The
anti-slavery men had seen slavery die in their own communities, and
expected it to die the same way in others, with as little active effort
on their own part. The Southern planters, born and reared in a slave
system, thought that some day the system might change, and possibly
disappear; but active effort to this end on their part was ever farthest
from their thoughts. Here, then, began that fatal policy toward slavery
and the slave-trade that characterized the nation for three-quarters of
a century, the policy of _laissez-faire, laissez-passer_.


31. ~The Action of the Confederation.~ The slave-trade was hardly
touched upon in the Congress of the Confederation, except in the
ordinance respecting the capture of slaves, and on the occasion of the
Quaker petition against the trade, although, during the debate on the
Articles of Confederation, the counting of slaves as well as of freemen
in the apportionment of taxes was urged as a measure that would check
further importation of Negroes. "It is our duty," said Wilson of
Pennsylvania, "to lay every discouragement on the importation of slaves;
but this amendment [i.e., to count two slaves as one freeman] would give
the _jus trium liberorum_ to him who would import slaves."[35] The
matter was finally compromised by apportioning requisitions according to
the value of land and buildings.

After the Articles went into operation, an ordinance in regard to the
recapture of fugitive slaves provided that, if the capture was made on
the sea below high-water mark, and the Negro was not claimed, he should
be freed. Matthews of South Carolina demanded the yeas and nays on this
proposition, with the result that only the vote of his State was
recorded against it.[36]

On Tuesday, October 3, 1783, a deputation from the Yearly Meeting of the
Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and Delaware Friends asked leave to present a
petition. Leave was granted the following day,[37] but no further minute
appears. According to the report of the Friends, the petition was
against the slave-trade; and "though the Christian rectitude of the
concern was by the Delegates generally acknowledged, yet not being
vested with the powers of legislation, they declined promoting any
public remedy against the gross national iniquity of trafficking in the
persons of fellow-men."[38]

The only legislative activity in regard to the trade during the
Confederation was taken by the individual States.[39] Before 1778
Connecticut, Vermont, Pennsylvania, Delaware, and Virginia had by law
stopped the further importation of slaves, and importation had
practically ceased in all the New England and Middle States, including
Maryland. In consequence of the revival of the slave-trade after the
War, there was then a lull in State activity until 1786, when North
Carolina laid a prohibitive duty, and South Carolina, a year later,
began her series of temporary prohibitions. In 1787-1788 the New England
States forbade the participation of their citizens in the traffic. It
was this wave of legislation against the traffic which did so much to
blind the nation as to the strong hold which slavery still had on the
country.


FOOTNOTES:

  [1] These figures are from the _Report of the Lords of the
      Committee of Council_, etc. (London, 1789).

  [2] Sheffield, _Observations on American Commerce_, p. 28;
      P.L. Ford, _The Association of the First Congress_, in
      _Political Science Quarterly_, VI. 615-7.

  [3] Cf., e.g., Arthur Lee's letter to R.H. Lee, March 18,
      1774, in which non-intercourse is declared "the only advisable
      and sure mode of defence": Force, _American Archives_, 4th
      Ser., I. 229. Cf. also _Ibid._, p. 240; Ford, in _Political
      Science Quarterly_, VI. 614-5.

  [4] Goodloe, _Birth of the Republic_, p. 260.

  [5] Staples, _Annals of Providence_ (1843), p. 235.

  [6] Force, _American Archives_, 4th Ser., I. 735. This was
      probably copied from the Virginia resolve.

  [7] Force, _American Archives_, 4th Ser., I. 600.

  [8] _Ibid._, I. 494, 530. Cf. pp. 523, 616, 641, etc.

  [9] _Ibid._, I. 687.

 [10] _Ibid._, I. 511, 526. Cf. also p. 316.

 [11] _Journals of Cong._, I. 20. Cf. Ford, in _Political
      Science Quarterly_, VI. 615-7.

 [12] John Adams, _Works_, II. 382.

 [13] _Journals of Cong._, I. 21.

 [14] _Ibid._, I. 24; Drayton; _Memoirs of the American
      Revolution_, I. 147; John Adams, _Works_, II. 394.

 [15] _Journals of Cong._, I. 27, 32-8.

 [16] Danbury, Dec. 12, 1774: Force, _American Archives_, 4th
      Ser., I. 1038. This case and that of Georgia are the only ones
      I have found in which the slave-trade clause was specifically
      mentioned.

 [17] Force, _American Archives_, 4th Ser., I. 1033, 1136,
      1160, 1163; II. 279-281, 1544; _Journals of Cong._, May 13,
      15, 17, 1775.

 [18] Force, _American Archives_, 4th Ser., I. 1136.

 [19] _Ibid._, II. 279-81.

 [20] _Ibid._, I. 1160.

 [21] Force, _American Archives_, 4th Ser., I. 1163.

 [22] _Journals of Cong._, May 13, 15, 1775.

 [23] _Ibid._, May 17, 1775.

 [24] Force, _American Archives_, 4th Ser., II. 1545.

 [25] Drayton, _Memoirs of the American Revolution_, I. 182.
      Cf. pp. 181-7; Ramsay, _History of S. Carolina_, I. 231.

 [26] Force, _American Archives_, 4th Ser., II. 33-4.

 [27] _Journals of Cong._, II. 122.

 [28] Clarkson, _Impolicy of the Slave-Trade_, pp. 125-8.

 [29] _Ibid._, pp. 25-6.

 [30] _Ibid._

 [31] Jefferson, _Works_ (Washington, 1853-4), I. 23-4. On the
      Declaration as an anti-slavery document, cf. Elliot, _Debates_
      (1861), I. 89.

 [32] Jefferson, _Works_ (Washington, 1853-4), I. 19.

 [33] Clarkson, _Impolicy of the Slave-Trade_, pp. 25-6;
      _Report_, etc., as above.

 [34] Witness the many high duty acts on slaves, and the
      revenue derived therefrom. Massachusetts had sixty
      distilleries running in 1783. Cf. Sheffield, _Observations on
      American Commerce_, p. 267.

 [35] Elliot, _Debates_, I. 72-3. Cf. Art. 8 of the Articles of
      Confederation.

 [36] _Journals of Cong._, 1781, June 25; July 18; Sept. 21,
      27; Nov. 8, 13, 30; Dec. 4.

 [37] _Ibid._, 1782-3, pp. 418-9, 425.

 [38] _Annals of Cong._, 1 Cong. 2 sess. p. 1183.

 [39] Cf. above, chapters ii., iii., iv.

                    *       *       *       *       *




_Chapter VI_

THE FEDERAL CONVENTION. 1787.

  32. The First Proposition.
  33. The General Debate.
  34. The Special Committee and the "Bargain."
  35. The Appeal to the Convention.
  36. Settlement by the Convention.
  37. Reception of the Clause by the Nation.
  38. Attitude of the State Conventions.
  39. Acceptance of the Policy.


32. ~The First Proposition.~ Slavery occupied no prominent place in the
Convention called to remedy the glaring defects of the Confederation,
for the obvious reason that few of the delegates thought it expedient to
touch a delicate subject which, if let alone, bade fair to settle itself
in a manner satisfactory to all. Consequently, neither slavery nor the
slave-trade is specifically mentioned in the delegates' credentials of
any of the States, nor in Randolph's, Pinckney's, or Hamilton's plans,
nor in Paterson's propositions. Indeed, the debate from May 14 to June
19, when the Committee of the Whole reported, touched the subject only
in the matter of the ratio of representation of slaves. With this same
exception, the report of the Committee of the Whole contained no
reference to slavery or the slave-trade, and the twenty-three
resolutions of the Convention referred to the Committee of Detail, July
23 and 26, maintain the same silence.

The latter committee, consisting of Rutledge, Randolph, Gorham,
Ellsworth, and Wilson, reported a draft of the Constitution August 6,
1787. The committee had, in its deliberations, probably made use of a
draft of a national Constitution made by Edmund Randolph.[1] One clause
of this provided that "no State shall lay a duty on imports;" and, also,
"1. No duty on exports. 2. No prohibition on such inhabitants as the
United States think proper to admit. 3. No duties by way of such
prohibition." It does not appear that any reference to Negroes was here
intended. In the extant copy, however, notes in Edward Rutledge's
handwriting change the second clause to "No prohibition on such
inhabitants or people as the several States think proper to admit."[2]
In the report, August 6, these clauses take the following form:--

    "Article VII. Section 4. No tax or duty shall be laid by the
    legislature on articles exported from any state; nor on the
    migration or importation of such persons as the several states
    shall think proper to admit; nor shall such migration or
    importation be prohibited."[3]


33. ~The General Debate.~ This, of course, referred both to immigrants
("migration") and to slaves ("importation").[4] Debate on this section
began Tuesday, August 22, and lasted two days. Luther Martin of Maryland
precipitated the discussion by a proposition to alter the section so as
to allow a prohibition or tax on the importation of slaves. The debate
immediately became general, being carried on principally by Rutledge,
the Pinckneys, and Williamson from the Carolinas; Baldwin of Georgia;
Mason, Madison, and Randolph of Virginia; Wilson and Gouverneur Morris
of Pennsylvania; Dickinson of Delaware; and Ellsworth, Sherman, Gerry,
King, and Langdon of New England.[5]

In this debate the moral arguments were prominent. Colonel George Mason
of Virginia denounced the traffic in slaves as "infernal;" Luther Martin
of Maryland regarded it as "inconsistent with the principles of the
revolution, and dishonorable to the American character." "Every
principle of honor and safety," declared John Dickinson of Delaware,
"demands the exclusion of slaves." Indeed, Mason solemnly averred that
the crime of slavery might yet bring the judgment of God on the nation.
On the other side, Rutledge of South Carolina bluntly declared that
religion and humanity had nothing to do with the question, that it was a
matter of "interest" alone. Gerry of Massachusetts wished merely to
refrain from giving direct sanction to the trade, while others contented
themselves with pointing out the inconsistency of condemning the
slave-trade and defending slavery.

The difficulty of the whole argument, from the moral standpoint, lay in
the fact that it was completely checkmated by the obstinate attitude of
South Carolina and Georgia. Their delegates--Baldwin, the Pinckneys,
Rutledge, and others--asserted flatly, not less than a half-dozen times
during the debate, that these States "can never receive the plan if it
prohibits the slave-trade;" that "if the Convention thought" that these
States would consent to a stoppage of the slave-trade, "the expectation
is vain."[6] By this stand all argument from the moral standpoint was
virtually silenced, for the Convention evidently agreed with Roger
Sherman of Connecticut that "it was better to let the Southern States
import slaves than to part with those States."

In such a dilemma the Convention listened not unwillingly to the _non
possumus_ arguments of the States' Rights advocates. The "morality and
wisdom" of slavery, declared Ellsworth of Connecticut, "are
considerations belonging to the States themselves;" let every State
"import what it pleases;" the Confederation has not "meddled" with the
question, why should the Union? It is a dangerous symptom of
centralization, cried Baldwin of Georgia; the "central States" wish to
be the "vortex for everything," even matters of "a local nature." The
national government, said Gerry of Massachusetts, had nothing to do with
slavery in the States; it had only to refrain from giving direct
sanction to the system. Others opposed this whole argument, declaring,
with Langdon of New Hampshire, that Congress ought to have this power,
since, as Dickinson tartly remarked, "The true question was, whether the
national happiness would be promoted or impeded by the importation; and
this question ought to be left to the national government, not to the
states particularly interested."

Beside these arguments as to the right of the trade and the proper seat
of authority over it, many arguments of general expediency were
introduced. From an economic standpoint, for instance, General C.C.
Pinckney of South Carolina "contended, that the importation of slaves
would be for the interest of the whole Union. The more slaves, the more
produce." Rutledge of the same State declared: "If the Northern States
consult their interest, they will not oppose the increase of slaves,
which will increase the commodities of which they will become the
carriers." This sentiment found a more or less conscious echo in the
words of Ellsworth of Connecticut, "What enriches a part enriches the
whole." It was, moreover, broadly hinted that the zeal of Maryland and
Virginia against the trade had an economic rather than a humanitarian
motive, since they had slaves enough and to spare, and wished to sell
them at a high price to South Carolina and Georgia, who needed more. In
such case restrictions would unjustly discriminate against the latter
States. The argument from history was barely touched upon. Only once was
there an allusion to "the example of all the world" "in all ages" to
justify slavery,[7] and once came the counter declaration that "Greece
and Rome were made unhappy by their slaves."[8] On the other hand, the
military weakness of slavery in the late war led to many arguments on
that score. Luther Martin and George Mason dwelt on the danger of a
servile class in war and insurrection; while Rutledge hotly replied that
he "would readily exempt the other states from the obligation to protect
the Southern against them;" and Ellsworth thought that the very danger
would "become a motive to kind treatment." The desirability of keeping
slavery out of the West was once mentioned as an argument against the
trade: to this all seemed tacitly to agree.[9]

Throughout the debate it is manifest that the Convention had no desire
really to enter upon a general slavery argument. The broader and more
theoretic aspects of the question were but lightly touched upon here and
there. Undoubtedly, most of the members would have much preferred not to
raise the question at all; but, as it was raised, the differences of
opinion were too manifest to be ignored, and the Convention, after its
first perplexity, gradually and perhaps too willingly set itself to work
to find some "middle ground" on which all parties could stand. The way
to this compromise was pointed out by the South. The most radical
pro-slavery arguments always ended with the opinion that "if the
Southern States were let alone, they will probably of themselves stop
importations."[10] To be sure, General Pinckney admitted that,
"candidly, he did not think South Carolina would stop her importations
of slaves in any short time;" nevertheless, the Convention "observed,"
with Roger Sherman, "that the abolition of slavery seemed to be going on
in the United States, and that the good sense of the several states
would probably by degrees complete it." Economic forces were evoked to
eke out moral motives: when the South had its full quota of slaves, like
Virginia it too would abolish the trade; free labor was bound finally to
drive out slave labor. Thus the chorus of "_laissez-faire_" increased;
and compromise seemed at least in sight, when Connecticut cried, "Let
the trade alone!" and Georgia denounced it as an "evil." Some few
discordant notes were heard, as, for instance, when Wilson of
Pennsylvania made the uncomforting remark, "If South Carolina and
Georgia were themselves disposed to get rid of the importation of slaves
in a short time, as had been suggested, they would never refuse to unite
because the importation might be prohibited."

With the spirit of compromise in the air, it was not long before the
general terms were clear. The slavery side was strongly intrenched, and
had a clear and definite demand. The forces of freedom were, on the
contrary, divided by important conflicts of interest, and animated by no
very strong and decided anti-slavery spirit with settled aims. Under
such circumstances, it was easy for the Convention to miss the
opportunity for a really great compromise, and to descend to a scheme
that savored unpleasantly of "log-rolling." The student of the situation
will always have good cause to believe that a more sturdy and definite
anti-slavery stand at this point might have changed history for the
better.


34. ~The Special Committee and the "Bargain."~ Since the debate had, in
the first place, arisen from a proposition to tax the importation of
slaves, the yielding of this point by the South was the first move
toward compromise. To all but the doctrinaires, who shrank from taxing
men as property, the argument that the failure to tax slaves was
equivalent to a bounty, was conclusive. With this point settled,
Randolph voiced the general sentiment, when he declared that he "was for
committing, in order that some middle ground might, if possible, be
found." Finally, Gouverneur Morris discovered the "middle ground," in
his suggestion that the whole subject be committed, "including the
clauses relating to taxes on exports and to a navigation act. These
things," said he, "may form a bargain among the Northern and Southern
States." This was quickly assented to; and sections four and five, on
slave-trade and capitation tax, were committed by a vote of 7 to 3,[11]
and section six, on navigation acts, by a vote of 9 to 2.[12] All three
clauses were referred to the following committee: Langdon of New
Hampshire, King of Massachusetts, Johnson of Connecticut, Livingston of
New Jersey, Clymer of Pennsylvania, Dickinson of Delaware, Martin of
Maryland, Madison of Virginia, Williamson of North Carolina, General
Pinckney of South Carolina, and Baldwin of Georgia.

The fullest account of the proceedings of this committee is given in
Luther Martin's letter to his constituents, and is confirmed in its main
particulars by similar reports of other delegates. Martin writes: "A
committee of _one_ member from each state was chosen by ballot, to take
this part of the system under their consideration, and to endeavor to
agree upon some report which should reconcile those states [i.e., South
Carolina and Georgia]. To this committee also was referred the following
proposition, which had been reported by the committee of detail, viz.:
'No navigation act shall be passed without the assent of two thirds of
the members present in each house'--a proposition which the staple and
commercial states were solicitous to retain, lest their commerce should
be placed too much under the power of the Eastern States, but which
these last States were as anxious to reject. This committee--of which
also I had the honor to be a member--met, and took under their
consideration the subjects committed to them. I found the _Eastern_
States, notwithstanding their _aversion to slavery_, were very willing
to indulge the Southern States at least with a temporary liberty to
prosecute the slave trade, provided the Southern States would, in their
turn, gratify _them_, by laying no restriction on navigation acts; and
after a very little time, the committee, by a great majority, agreed on
a report, by which the general government was to be prohibited from
preventing the importation of slaves for a limited time, and the
restrictive clause relative to navigation acts was to be omitted."[13]

That the "bargain" was soon made is proven by the fact that the
committee reported the very next day, Friday, August 24, and that on
Saturday the report was taken up. It was as follows: "Strike out so much
of the fourth section as was referred to the committee, and insert 'The
migration or importation of such persons as the several states, now
existing, shall think proper to admit, shall not be prohibited by the
legislature prior to the year 1800; but a tax or duty may be imposed on
such migration or importation, at a rate not exceeding the average of
the duties laid on imports.' The fifth section to remain as in the
report. The sixth section to be stricken out."[14]


35. ~The Appeal to the Convention.~ The ensuing debate,[15] which lasted
only a part of the day, was evidently a sort of appeal to the House on
the decisions of the committee. It throws light on the points of
disagreement. General Pinckney first proposed to extend the
slave-trading limit to 1808, and Gorham of Massachusetts seconded the
motion. This brought a spirited protest from Madison: "Twenty years will
produce all the mischief that can be apprehended from the liberty to
import slaves. So long a term will be more dishonorable to the American
character than to say nothing about it in the Constitution."[16] There
was, however, evidently another "bargain" here; for, without farther
debate, the South and the East voted the extension, 7 to 4, only New
Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, and Virginia objecting. The ambiguous
phraseology of the whole slave-trade section as reported did not pass
without comment; Gouverneur Morris would have it read: "The importation
of slaves into North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia, shall not be
prohibited," etc.[17] This emendation was, however, too painfully
truthful for the doctrinaires, and was, amid a score of objections,
withdrawn. The taxation clause also was manifestly too vague for
practical use, and Baldwin of Georgia wished to amend it by inserting
"common impost on articles not enumerated," in lieu of the "average"
duty.[18] This minor point gave rise to considerable argument: Sherman
and Madison deprecated any such recognition of property in man as taxing
would imply; Mason and Gorham argued that the tax restrained the trade;
while King, Langdon, and General Pinckney contented themselves with the
remark that this clause was "the price of the first part." Finally, it
was unanimously agreed to make the duty "not exceeding ten dollars for
each person."[19]

Southern interests now being safe, some Southern members attempted, a
few days later, to annul the "bargain" by restoring the requirement of a
two-thirds vote in navigation acts. Charles Pinckney made the motion, in
an elaborate speech designed to show the conflicting commercial
interests of the States; he declared that "The power of regulating
commerce was a pure concession on the part of the Southern States."[20]
Martin and Williamson of North Carolina, Butler of South Carolina, and
Mason of Virginia defended the proposition, insisting that it would be a
dangerous concession on the part of the South to leave navigation acts
to a mere majority vote. Sherman of Connecticut, Morris of Pennsylvania,
and Spaight of North Carolina declared that the very diversity of
interest was a security. Finally, by a vote of 7 to 4, Maryland,
Virginia, North Carolina, and Georgia being in the minority, the
Convention refused to consider the motion, and the recommendation of the
committee passed.[21]

When, on September 10, the Convention was discussing the amendment
clause of the Constitution, the ever-alert Rutledge, perceiving that
the results of the laboriously settled "bargain" might be endangered,
declared that he "never could agree to give a power by which the
articles relating to slaves might be altered by the states not
interested in that property."[22] As a result, the clause finally
adopted, September 15, had the proviso: "Provided, that no amendment
which may be made prior to the year 1808 shall in any manner affect the
1st and 4th clauses in the 9th section of the 1st article."[23]


36. ~Settlement by the Convention.~ Thus, the slave-trade article of the
Constitution stood finally as follows:--

    "Article I. Section 9. The Migration or Importation of such
    Persons as any of the States now existing shall think proper to
    admit, shall not be prohibited by the Congress prior to the Year
    one thousand eight hundred and eight, but a Tax or duty may be
    imposed on such Importation, not exceeding ten dollars for each
    Person."

This settlement of the slavery question brought out distinct differences
of moral attitude toward the institution, and yet differences far from
hopeless. To be sure, the South apologized for slavery, the Middle
States denounced it, and the East could only tolerate it from afar; and
yet all three sections united in considering it a temporary institution,
the corner-stone of which was the slave-trade. No one of them had ever
seen a system of slavery without an active slave-trade; and there were
probably few members of the Convention who did not believe that the
foundations of slavery had been sapped merely by putting the abolition
of the slave-trade in the hands of Congress twenty years hence. Here lay
the danger; for when the North called slavery "temporary," she thought
of twenty or thirty years, while the "temporary" period of the South was
scarcely less than a century. Meantime, for at least a score of years, a
policy of strict _laissez-faire_, so far as the general government was
concerned, was to intervene. Instead of calling the whole moral energy
of the people into action, so as gradually to crush this portentous
evil, the Federal Convention lulled the nation to sleep by a "bargain,"
and left to the vacillating and unripe judgment of the States one of the
most threatening of the social and political ills which they were so
courageously seeking to remedy.


37. ~Reception of the Clause by the Nation.~ When the proposed
Constitution was before the country, the slave-trade article came in for
no small amount of condemnation and apology. In the pamphlets of the day
it was much discussed. One of the points in Mason's "Letter of
Objections" was that "the general legislature is restrained from
prohibiting the further importation of slaves for twenty odd years,
though such importations render the United States weaker, more
vulnerable, and less capable of defence."[24] To this Iredell replied,
through the columns of the _State Gazette_ of North Carolina: "If all
the States had been willing to adopt this regulation [i.e., to prohibit
the slave-trade], I should as an individual most heartily have approved
of it, because even if the importation of slaves in fact rendered us
stronger, less vulnerable and more capable of defence, I should rejoice
in the prohibition of it, as putting an end to a trade which has already
continued too long for the honor and humanity of those concerned in it.
But as it was well known that South Carolina and Georgia thought a
further continuance of such importations useful to them, and would not
perhaps otherwise have agreed to the new constitution, those States
which had been importing till they were satisfied, could not with
decency have insisted upon their relinquishing advantages themselves had
already enjoyed. Our situation makes it necessary to bear the evil as it
is. It will be left to the future legislatures to allow such
importations or not. If any, in violation of their clear conviction of
the injustice of this trade, persist in pursuing it, this is a matter
between God and their own consciences. The interests of humanity will,
however, have gained something by the prohibition of this inhuman trade,
though at a distance of twenty odd years."[25]

"Centinel," representing the Quaker sentiment of Pennsylvania, attacked
the clause in his third letter, published in the _Independent Gazetteer,
or The Chronicle of Freedom_, November 8, 1787: "We are told that the
objects of this article are slaves, and that it is inserted to secure to
the southern states the right of introducing negroes for twenty-one
years to come, against the declared sense of the other states to put an
end to an odious traffic in the human species, which is especially
scandalous and inconsistent in a people, who have asserted their own
liberty by the sword, and which dangerously enfeebles the districts
wherein the laborers are bondsmen. The words, dark and ambiguous, such
as no plain man of common sense would have used, are evidently chosen to
conceal from Europe, that in this enlightened country, the practice of
slavery has its advocates among men in the highest stations. When it is
recollected that no poll tax can be imposed on _five_ negroes, above
what _three_ whites shall be charged; when it is considered, that the
imposts on the consumption of Carolina field negroes must be trifling,
and the excise nothing, it is plain that the proportion of
contributions, which can be expected from the southern states under the
new constitution, will be unequal, and yet they are to be allowed to
enfeeble themselves by the further importation of negroes till the year
1808. Has not the concurrence of the five southern states (in the
convention) to the new system, been purchased too dearly by the
rest?"[26]

Noah Webster's "Examination" (1787) addressed itself to such Quaker
scruples: "But, say the enemies of slavery, negroes may be imported for
twenty-one years. This exception is addressed to the quakers, and a very
pitiful exception it is. The truth is, Congress cannot prohibit the
importation of slaves during that period; but the laws against the
importation into particular states, stand unrepealed. An immediate
abolition of slavery would bring ruin upon the whites, and misery upon
the blacks, in the southern states. The constitution has therefore
wisely left each state to pursue its own measures, with respect to this
article of legislation, during the period of twenty-one years."[27]

The following year the "Examination" of Tench Coxe said: "The temporary
reservation of any particular matter must ever be deemed an admission
that it should be done away. This appears to have been well understood.
In addition to the arguments drawn from liberty, justice and religion,
opinions against this practice [i.e., of slave-trading], founded in
sound policy, have no doubt been urged. Regard was necessarily paid to
the peculiar situation of our southern fellow-citizens; but they, on the
other hand, have not been insensible of the delicate situation of our
national character on this subject."[28]

From quite different motives Southern men defended this section. For
instance, Dr. David Ramsay, a South Carolina member of the Convention,
wrote in his "Address": "It is farther objected, that they have
stipulated for a right to prohibit the importation of negroes after 21
years. On this subject observe, as they are bound to protect us from
domestic violence, they think we ought not to increase our exposure to
that evil, by an unlimited importation of slaves. Though Congress may
forbid the importation of negroes after 21 years, it does not follow
that they will. On the other hand, it is probable that they will not.
The more rice we make, the more business will be for their shipping;
their interest will therefore coincide with ours. Besides, we have other
sources of supply--the importation of the ensuing 20 years, added to the
natural increase of those we already have, and the influx from our
northern neighbours who are desirous of getting rid of their slaves,
will afford a sufficient number for cultivating all the lands in this
state."[29]

Finally, _The Federalist_, No. 41, written by James Madison, commented
as follows: "It were doubtless to be wished, that the power of
prohibiting the importation of slaves had not been postponed until the
year 1808, or rather, that it had been suffered to have immediate
operation. But it is not difficult to account, either for this
restriction on the General Government, or for the manner in which the
whole clause is expressed. It ought to be considered as a great point
gained in favor of humanity, that a period of twenty years may terminate
forever, within these States, a traffic which has so long and so loudly
upbraided the barbarism of modern policy; that within that period, it
will receive a considerable discouragement from the Federal Government,
and may be totally abolished, by a concurrence of the few States which
continue the unnatural traffic, in the prohibitory example which has
been given by so great a majority of the Union. Happy would it be for
the unfortunate Africans, if an equal prospect lay before them of being
redeemed from the oppressions of their European brethren!

"Attempts have been made to pervert this clause into an objection
against the Constitution, by representing it on one side as a criminal
toleration of an illicit practice, and on another, as calculated to
prevent voluntary and beneficial emigrations from Europe to America. I
mention these misconstructions, not with a view to give them an answer,
for they deserve none; but as specimens of the manner and spirit, in
which some have thought fit to conduct their opposition to the proposed
Government."[30]


38. ~Attitude of the State Conventions.~ The records of the proceedings
in the various State conventions are exceedingly meagre. In nearly all
of the few States where records exist there is found some opposition to
the slave-trade clause. The opposition was seldom very pronounced or
bitter; it rather took the form of regret, on the one hand that the
Convention went so far, and on the other hand that it did not go
farther. Probably, however, the Constitution was never in danger of
rejection on account of this clause.

Extracts from a few of the speeches, _pro_ and _con_, in various States
will best illustrate the character of the arguments. In reply to some
objections expressed in the Pennsylvania convention, Wilson said,
December 3, 1787: "I consider this as laying the foundation for
banishing slavery out of this country; and though the period is more
distant than I could wish, yet it will produce the same kind, gradual
change, which was pursued in Pennsylvania."[31] Robert Barnwell declared
in the South Carolina convention, January 17, 1788, that this clause
"particularly pleased" him. "Congress," he said, "has guarantied this
right for that space of time, and at its expiration may continue it as
long as they please. This question then arises--What will their interest
lead them to do? The Eastern States, as the honorable gentleman says,
will become the carriers of America. It will, therefore, certainly be
their interest to encourage exportation to as great an extent as
possible; and if the quantum of our products will be diminished by the
prohibition of negroes, I appeal to the belief of every man, whether he
thinks those very carriers will themselves dam up the sources from
whence their profit is derived. To think so is so contradictory to the
general conduct of mankind, that I am of opinion, that, without we
ourselves put a stop to them, the traffic for negroes will continue
forever."[32]

In Massachusetts, January 30, 1788, General Heath said: "The gentlemen
who have spoken have carried the matter rather too far on both sides. I
apprehend that it is not in our power to do anything for or against
those who are in slavery in the southern States.... Two questions
naturally arise, if we ratify the Constitution: Shall we do anything by
our act to hold the blacks in slavery? or shall we become partakers of
other men's sins? I think neither of them. Each State is sovereign and
independent to a certain degree, and they have a right, and will
regulate their own internal affairs, as to themselves appears
proper."[33] Iredell said, in the North Carolina convention, July 26,
1788: "When the entire abolition of slavery takes place, it will be an
event which must be pleasing to every generous mind, and every friend of
human nature.... But as it is, this government is nobly distinguished
above others by that very provision."[34]

Of the arguments against the clause, two made in the Massachusetts
convention are typical. The Rev. Mr. Neal said, January 25, 1788, that
"unless his objection [to this clause] was removed, he could not put his
hand to the Constitution."[35] General Thompson exclaimed, "Shall it be
said, that after we have established our own independence and freedom,
we make slaves of others?"[36] Mason, in the Virginia convention, June
15, 1788, said: "As much as I value a union of all the states, I would
not admit the Southern States into the Union unless they agree to the
discontinuance of this disgraceful trade.... Yet they have not secured
us the property of the slaves we have already. So that 'they have done
what they ought not to have done, and have left undone what they ought
to have done.'"[37] Joshua Atherton, who led the opposition in the New
Hampshire convention, said: "The idea that strikes those who are opposed
to this clause so disagreeably and so forcibly is,--hereby it is
conceived (if we ratify the Constitution) that we become _consenters to_
and _partakers in_ the sin and guilt of this abominable traffic, at
least for a certain period, without any positive stipulation that it
shall even then be brought to an end."[38]

In the South Carolina convention Lowndes, January 16, 1788, attacked the
slave-trade clause. "Negroes," said he, "were our wealth, our only
natural resource; yet behold how our kind friends in the north were
determined soon to tie up our hands, and drain us of what we had! The
Eastern States drew their means of subsistence, in a great measure, from
their shipping; and, on that head, they had been particularly careful
not to allow of any burdens.... Why, then, call this a reciprocal
bargain, which took all from one party, to bestow it on the other!"[39]

In spite of this discussion in the different States, only one State,
Rhode Island, went so far as to propose an amendment directing Congress
to "promote and establish such laws and regulations as may effectually
prevent the importation of slaves of every description, into the United
States."[40]


39. ~Acceptance of the Policy.~ As in the Federal Convention, so in the
State conventions, it is noticeable that the compromise was accepted by
the various States from widely different motives.[41] Nevertheless,
these motives were not fixed and unchangeable, and there was still
discernible a certain underlying agreement in the dislike of slavery.
One cannot help thinking that if the devastation of the late war had not
left an extraordinary demand for slaves in the South,--if, for instance,
there had been in 1787 the same plethora in the slave-market as in
1774,--the future history of the country would have been far different.
As it was, the twenty-one years of _laissez-faire_ were confirmed by the
States, and the nation entered upon the constitutional period with the
slave-trade legal in three States,[42] and with a feeling of quiescence
toward it in the rest of the Union.


FOOTNOTES:

  [1] Conway, _Life and Papers of Edmund Randolph_, ch. ix.

  [2] Conway, _Life and Papers of Edmund Randolph_, p. 78.

  [3] Elliot, _Debates_, I. 227.

  [4] Cf. Conway, _Life and Papers of Edmund Randolph_, pp.
      78-9.

  [5] For the following debate, Madison's notes (Elliot,
      _Debates_, V. 457 ff.) are mainly followed.

  [6] Cf. Elliot, _Debates_, V, _passim_.

  [7] By Charles Pinckney.

  [8] By John Dickinson.

  [9] Mentioned in the speech of George Mason.

 [10] Charles Pinckney. Baldwin of Georgia said that if the
      State were left to herself, "she may probably put a stop to
      the evil": Elliot, _Debates_, V. 459.

 [11] _Affirmative:_ Connecticut, New Jersey, Maryland,
      Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia,--7.
      _Negative:_ New Hampshire, Pennsylvania, Delaware,--3.
      _Absent:_ Massachusetts,--1.

 [12] _Negative:_ Connecticut and New Jersey.

 [13] Luther Martin's letter, in Elliot, _Debates_, I. 373. Cf.
      explanations of delegates in the South Carolina, North
      Carolina, and other conventions.

 [14] Elliot, _Debates_, V. 471.

 [15] Saturday, Aug. 25, 1787.

 [16] Elliot, _Debates_, V. 477.

 [17] Elliot, _Debates_, V. 477. Dickinson made a similar
      motion, which was disagreed to: _Ibid._

 [18] _Ibid._, V. 478.

 [19] _Ibid._

 [20] Aug. 29: _Ibid._, V. 489.

 [21] _Ibid._, V. 492.

 [22] Elliot, _Debates_, V. 532.

 [23] _Ibid._, I. 317.

 [24] P.L. Ford, _Pamphlets on the Constitution_, p. 331.

 [25] _Ibid._, p. 367.

 [26] McMaster and Stone, _Pennsylvania and the Federal
      Convention_, pp. 599-600. Cf. also p. 773.

 [27] See Ford, _Pamphlets_, etc., p. 54.

 [28] Ford, _Pamphlets_, etc., p. 146.

 [29] "Address to the Freemen of South Carolina on the Subject
      of the Federal Constitution": _Ibid._, p. 378.

 [30] Published in the _New York Packet_, Jan. 22, 1788;
      reprinted in Dawson's _Foederalist_, I. 290-1.

 [31] Elliot, _Debates_, II. 452.

 [32] Elliot, _Debates_, IV. 296-7.

 [33] Published in _Debates of the Massachusetts Convention_,
      1788, p. 217 ff.

 [34] Elliot, _Debates_, IV. 100-1.

 [35] Published in _Debates of the Massachusetts Convention_,
      1788, p. 208.

 [36] _Ibid._

 [37] Elliot, _Debates_, III. 452-3.

 [38] Walker, _Federal Convention of New Hampshire_, App. 113;
      Elliot, Debates, II. 203.

 [39] Elliot, _Debates_, IV. 273.

 [40] Updike's _Minutes_, in Staples, _Rhode Island in the
      Continental Congress_, pp. 657-8, 674-9. Adopted by a majority
      of one in a convention of seventy.

 [41] In five States I have found no mention of the subject
      (Delaware, New Jersey, Georgia, Connecticut, and Maryland). In
      the Pennsylvania convention there was considerable debate,
      partially preserved in Elliot's and Lloyd's _Debates_. In the
      Massachusetts convention the debate on this clause occupied a
      part of two or three days, reported in published debates. In
      South Carolina there were several long speeches, reported in
      Elliot's _Debates_. Only three speeches made in the New
      Hampshire convention seem to be extant, and two of these are
      on the slave-trade: cf. Walker and Elliot. The Virginia
      convention discussed the clause to considerable extent: see
      Elliot. The clause does not seem to have been a cause of North
      Carolina's delay in ratification, although it occasioned some
      discussion: see Elliot. In Rhode Island "much debate ensued,"
      and in this State alone was an amendment proposed: see
      Staples, _Rhode Island in the Continental Congress_. In New
      York the Committee of the Whole "proceeded through sections 8,
      9 ... with little or no debate": Elliot, _Debates_, II. 406.

 [42] South Carolina, Georgia, and North Carolina. North
      Carolina had, however, a prohibitive duty.

                    *       *       *       *       *




_Chapter VII_

TOUSSAINT L'OUVERTURE AND ANTI-SLAVERY EFFORT, 1787-1806.

  40. Influence of the Haytian Revolution.
  41. Legislation of the Southern States.
  42. Legislation of the Border States.
  43. Legislation of the Eastern States.
  44. First Debate in Congress, 1789.
  45. Second Debate in Congress, 1790.
  46. The Declaration of Powers, 1790.
  47. The Act of 1794.
  48. The Act of 1800.
  49. The Act of 1803.
  50. State of the Slave-Trade from 1789 to 1803.
  51. The South Carolina Repeal of 1803.
  52. The Louisiana Slave-Trade, 1803-1805.
  53. Last Attempts at Taxation, 1805-1806.
  54. Key-Note of the Period.


40. ~Influence of the Haytian Revolution.~ The rÃ´le which the great
Negro Toussaint, called L'Ouverture, played in the history of the United
States has seldom been fully appreciated. Representing the age of
revolution in America, he rose to leadership through a bloody terror,
which contrived a Negro "problem" for the Western Hemisphere,
intensified and defined the anti-slavery movement, became one of the
causes, and probably the prime one, which led Napoleon to sell Louisiana
for a song, and finally, through the interworking of all these effects,
rendered more certain the final prohibition of the slave-trade by the
United States in 1807.

From the time of the reorganization of the Pennsylvania Abolition
Society, in 1787, anti-slavery sentiment became active. New York, New
Jersey, Rhode Island, Delaware, Maryland, and Virginia had strong
organizations, and a national convention was held in 1794. The terrible
upheaval in the West Indies, beginning in 1791, furnished this rising
movement with an irresistible argument. A wave of horror and fear swept
over the South, which even the powerful slave-traders of Georgia did not
dare withstand; the Middle States saw their worst dreams realized, and
the mercenary trade interests of the East lost control of the New
England conscience.


41. ~Legislation of the Southern States.~ In a few years the growing
sentiment had crystallized into legislation. The Southern States took
immediate measures to close their ports, first against West India
Negroes, finally against all slaves. Georgia, who had had legal slavery
only from 1755, and had since passed no restrictive legislation, felt
compelled in 1793[1] to stop the entry of free Negroes, and in 1798[2]
to prohibit, under heavy penalties, the importation of all slaves. This
provision was placed in the Constitution of the State, and, although
miserably enforced, was never repealed.

South Carolina was the first Southern State in which the exigencies of a
great staple crop rendered the rapid consumption of slaves more
profitable than their proper maintenance. Alternating, therefore,
between a plethora and a dearth of Negroes, she prohibited the
slave-trade only for short periods. In 1788[3] she had forbidden the
trade for five years, and in 1792,[4] being peculiarly exposed to the
West Indian insurrection, she quickly found it "inexpedient" to allow
Negroes "from Africa, the West India Islands, or other place beyond sea"
to enter for two years. This act continued to be extended, although with
lessening penalties, until 1803.[5] The home demand in view of the
probable stoppage of the trade in 1808, the speculative chances of the
new Louisiana Territory trade, and the large already existing illicit
traffic combined in that year to cause the passage of an act, December
17, reopening the African slave-trade, although still carefully
excluding "West India" Negroes.[6] This action profoundly stirred the
Union, aroused anti-slavery sentiment, led to a concerted movement for a
constitutional amendment, and, failing in this, to an irresistible
demand for a national prohibitory act at the earliest constitutional
moment.

North Carolina had repealed her prohibitory duty act in 1790,[7] but in
1794 she passed an "Act to prevent further importation and bringing of
slaves," etc.[8] Even the body-servants of West India immigrants and,
naturally, all free Negroes, were eventually prohibited.[9]


42. ~Legislation of the Border States.~ The Border States, Virginia and
Maryland, strengthened their non-importation laws, Virginia freeing
illegally imported Negroes,[10] and Maryland prohibiting even the
interstate trade.[11] The Middle States took action chiefly in the final
abolition of slavery within their borders, and the prevention of the
fitting out of slaving vessels in their ports. Delaware declared, in her
Act of 1789, that "it is inconsistent with that spirit of general
liberty which pervades the constitution of this state, that vessels
should be fitted out, or equipped, in any of the ports thereof, for the
purpose of receiving and transporting the natives of Africa to places
where they are held in slavery,"[12] and forbade such a practice under
penalty of Â£500 for each person so engaged. The Pennsylvania Act of
1788[13] had similar provisions, with a penalty of Â£1000; and New Jersey
followed with an act in 1798.[14]


43. ~Legislation of the Eastern States.~ In the Eastern States, where
slavery as an institution was already nearly defunct, action was aimed
toward stopping the notorious participation of citizens in the
slave-trade outside the State. The prime movers were the Rhode Island
Quakers. Having early secured a law against the traffic in their own
State, they turned their attention to others. Through their
remonstrances Connecticut, in 1788,[15] prohibited participation in the
trade by a fine of Â£500 on the vessel, Â£50 on each slave, and loss of
insurance; this act was strengthened in 1792,[16] the year after the
Haytian revolt. Massachusetts, after many fruitless attempts, finally
took advantage of an unusually bold case of kidnapping, and passed a
similar act in 1788.[17] "This," says Belknap, "was the utmost which
could be done by our legislatures; we still have to regret the
impossibility of making a law _here_, which shall restrain our citizens
from carrying on this trade _in foreign bottoms_, and from committing
the crimes which this act prohibits, _in foreign countries_, as it is
said some of them have done since the enacting of these laws."[18]

Thus it is seen how, spurred by the tragedy in the West Indies, the
United States succeeded by State action in prohibiting the slave-trade
from 1798 to 1803, in furthering the cause of abolition, and in
preventing the fitting out of slave-trade expeditions in United States
ports. The country had good cause to congratulate itself. The national
government hastened to supplement State action as far as possible, and
the prophecies of the more sanguine Revolutionary fathers seemed about
to be realized, when the ill-considered act of South Carolina showed the
weakness of the constitutional compromise.


44. ~First Debate in Congress, 1789.~ The attention of the national
government was early directed to slavery and the trade by the rise, in
the first Congress, of the question of taxing slaves imported. During
the debate on the duty bill introduced by Clymer's committee, Parker of
Virginia moved, May 13, 1789, to lay a tax of ten dollars _per capita_
on slaves imported. He plainly stated that the tax was designed to check
the trade, and that he was "sorry that the Constitution prevented
Congress from prohibiting the importation altogether." The proposal was
evidently unwelcome, and caused an extended debate.[19] Smith of South
Carolina wanted to postpone a matter so "big with the most serious
consequences to the State he represented." Roger Sherman of Connecticut
"could not reconcile himself to the insertion of human beings as an
article of duty, among goods, wares, and merchandise." Jackson of
Georgia argued against any restriction, and thought such States as
Virginia "ought to let their neighbors get supplied, before they imposed
such a burden upon the importation." Tucker of South Carolina declared
it "unfair to bring in such an important subject at a time when debate
was almost precluded," and denied the right of Congress to "consider
whether the importation of slaves is proper or not."

Mr. Parker was evidently somewhat abashed by this onslaught of friend
and foe, but he "had ventured to introduce the subject after full
deliberation, and did not like to withdraw it." He desired Congress, "if
possible," to "wipe off the stigma under which America labored." This
brought Jackson of Georgia again to his feet. He believed, in spite of
the "fashion of the day," that the Negroes were better off as slaves
than as freedmen, and that, as the tax was partial, "it would be the
most odious tax Congress could impose." Such sentiments were a distinct
advance in pro-slavery doctrine, and called for a protest from Madison
of Virginia. He thought the discussion proper, denied the partiality of
the tax, and declared that, according to the spirit of the Constitution
and his own desire, it was to be hoped "that, by expressing a national
disapprobation of this trade, we may destroy it, and save ourselves from
reproaches, and our posterity the imbecility ever attendant on a country
filled with slaves." Finally, to Burke of South Carolina, who thought
"the gentlemen were contending for nothing," Madison sharply rejoined,
"If we contend for nothing, the gentlemen who are opposed to us do not
contend for a great deal."

It now became clear that Congress had been whirled into a discussion of
too delicate and lengthy a nature to allow its further prolongation.
Compromising councils prevailed; and it was agreed that the present
proposition should be withdrawn and a separate bill brought in. This
bill was, however, at the next session dexterously postponed "until the
next session of Congress."[20]


45. ~Second Debate in Congress, 1790.~ It is doubtful if Congress of its
own initiative would soon have resurrected the matter, had not a new
anti-slavery weapon appeared in the shape of urgent petitions from
abolition societies. The first petition, presented February 11,
1790,[21] was from the same interstate Yearly Meeting of Friends which
had formerly petitioned the Confederation Congress.[22] They urged
Congress to inquire "whether, notwithstanding such seeming impediments,
it be not in reality within your power to exercise justice and mercy,
which, if adhered to, we cannot doubt, must produce the abolition of the
slave trade," etc. Another Quaker petition from New York was also
presented,[23] and both were about to be referred, when Smith of South
Carolina objected, and precipitated a sharp debate.[24] This debate had
a distinctly different tone from that of the preceding one, and
represents another step in pro-slavery doctrine. The key-note of these
utterances was struck by Stone of Maryland, who "feared that if Congress
took any measures indicative of an intention to interfere with the kind
of property alluded to, it would sink it in value very considerably, and
might be injurious to a great number of the citizens, particularly in
the Southern States. He thought the subject was of general concern, and
that the petitioners had no more right to interfere with it than any
other members of the community. It was an unfortunate circumstance, that
it was the disposition of religious sects to imagine they understood the
rights of human nature better than all the world besides."

In vain did men like Madison disclaim all thought of unconstitutional
"interference," and express only a desire to see "If anything is within
the Federal authority to restrain such violation of the rights of
nations and of mankind, as is supposed to be practised in some parts of
the United States." A storm of disapproval from Southern members met
such sentiments. "The rights of the Southern States ought not to be
threatened," said Burke of South Carolina. "Any extraordinary attention
of Congress to this petition," averred Jackson of Georgia, would put
slave property "in jeopardy," and "evince to the people a disposition
towards a total emancipation." Smith and Tucker of South Carolina
declared that the request asked for "unconstitutional" measures. Gerry
of Massachusetts, Hartley of Pennsylvania, and Lawrence of New York
rather mildly defended the petitioners; but after considerable further
debate the matter was laid on the table.

The very next day, however, the laid ghost walked again in the shape of
another petition from the "Pennsylvania Society for promoting the
Abolition of Slavery," signed by its venerable president, Benjamin
Franklin. This petition asked Congress to "step to the very verge of the
power vested in you for discouraging every species of traffic in the
persons of our fellow-men."[25] Hartley of Pennsylvania called up the
memorial of the preceding day, and it was read a second time and a
motion for commitment made. Plain words now came from Tucker of South
Carolina. "The petition," he said, "contained an unconstitutional
request." The commitment would alarm the South. These petitions were
"mischievous" attempts to imbue the slaves with false hopes. The South
would not submit to a general emancipation without "civil war." The
commitment would "blow the trumpet of sedition in the Southern States,"
echoed his colleague, Burke. The Pennsylvania men spoke just as boldly.
Scott declared the petition constitutional, and was sorry that the
Constitution did not interdict this "most abominable" traffic. "Perhaps,
in our Legislative capacity," he said, "we can go no further than to
impose a duty of ten dollars, but I do not know how far I might go if I
was one of the Judges of the United States, and those people were to
come before me and claim their emancipation; but I am sure I would go as
far as I could." Jackson of Georgia rejoined in true Southern spirit,
boldly defending slavery in the light of religion and history, and
asking if it was "good policy to bring forward a business at this moment
likely to light up the flame of civil discord; for the people of the
Southern States will resist one tyranny as soon as another. The other
parts of the Continent may bear them down by force of arms, but they
will never suffer themselves to be divested of their property without a
struggle. The gentleman says, if he was a Federal Judge, he does not
know to what length he would go in emancipating these people; but I
believe his judgment would be of short duration in Georgia, perhaps even
the existence of such a Judge might be in danger." Baldwin, his
New-England-born colleague, urged moderation by reciting the difficulty
with which the constitutional compromise was reached, and declaring,
"the moment we go to jostle on that ground, I fear we shall feel it
tremble under our feet." Lawrence of New York wanted to commit the
memorials, in order to see how far Congress might constitutionally
interfere. Smith of South Carolina, in a long speech, said that his
constituents entered the Union "from political, not from moral motives,"
and that "we look upon this measure as an attack upon the palladium of
the property of our country." Page of Virginia, although a slave owner,
urged commitment, and Madison again maintained the appropriateness of
the request, and suggested that "regulations might be made in relation
to the introduction of them [i.e., slaves] into the new States to be
formed out of the Western Territory." Even conservative Gerry of
Massachusetts declared, with regard to the whole trade, that the fact
that "we have a right to regulate this business, is as clear as that we
have any rights whatever."

Finally, by a vote of 43 to 11, the memorials were committed, the South
Carolina and Georgia delegations, Bland and Coles of Virginia, Stone of
Maryland, and Sylvester of New York voting in the negative.[26] A
committee, consisting of Foster of New Hampshire, Huntington of
Connecticut, Gerry of Massachusetts, Lawrence of New York, Sinnickson of
New Jersey, Hartley of Pennsylvania, and Parker of Virginia, was charged
with the matter, and reported Friday, March 5. The absence of Southern
members on this committee compelled it to make this report a sort of
official manifesto on the aims of Northern anti-slavery politics. As
such, it was sure to meet with vehement opposition in the House, even
though conservatively worded. Such proved to be the fact when the
committee reported. The onslaught to "negative the whole report" was
prolonged and bitter, the debate _pro_ and _con_ lasting several
days.[27]


46. ~The Declaration of Powers, 1790.~ The result is best seen by
comparing the original report with the report of the Committee of the
Whole, adopted by a vote of 29 to 25 Monday, March 23, 1790:[28]--

      REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE.

      That, from the nature of the matters contained in these
      memorials, they were induced to examine the powers vested in
      Congress, under the present Constitution, relating to the
      Abolition of Slavery, and are clearly of opinion,

      _First._ That the General Government is expressly restrained
      from prohibiting the importation of such persons 'as any of
      the States now existing shall think proper to admit, until the
      year one thousand eight hundred and eight.'

      _Secondly._ That Congress, by a fair construction of the
      Constitution, are equally restrained from interfering in the
      emancipation of slaves, who already are, or who may, within
      the period mentioned, be imported into, or born within, any of
      the said States.

      _Thirdly._ That Congress have no authority to interfere in the
      internal regulations of particular States, relative to the
      instructions of slaves in the principles of morality and
      religion; to their comfortable clothing, accommodations, and
      subsistence; to the regulation of their marriages, and the
      prevention of the violation of the rights thereof, or to the
      separation of children from their parents; to a comfortable
      provision in cases of sickness, age, or infirmity; or to the
      seizure, transportation, or sale of free negroes; but have the
      fullest confidence in the wisdom and humanity of the
      Legislatures of the several States, that they will revise
      their laws from time to time, when necessary, and promote the
      objects mentioned in the memorials, and every other measure
      that may tend to the happiness of slaves.

      _Fourthly._ That, nevertheless, Congress have authority, if
      they shall think it necessary, to lay at any time a tax or
      duty, not exceeding ten dollars for each person of any
      description, the importation of whom shall be by any of the
      States admitted as aforesaid.

      _Fifthly._ That Congress have authority to interdict,[29] or
      (so far as it is or may be carried on by citizens of the
      United States, for supplying foreigners), to regulate the
      African trade, and to make provision for the humane treatment
      of slaves, in all cases while on their passage to the United
      States, or to foreign ports, so far as respects the citizens
      of the United States.

      _Sixthly._ That Congress have also authority to prohibit
      foreigners from fitting out vessels in any port of the United
      States, for transporting persons from Africa to any foreign
      port.

      _Seventhly._ That the memorialists be informed, that in all
      cases to which the authority of Congress extends, they will
      exercise it for the humane objects of the memorialists, so far
      as they can be promoted on the principles of justice,
      humanity, and good policy.

                    *       *       *       *       *

      REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE.

      _First._ That the migration or importation of such persons as
      any of the States now existing shall think proper to admit,
      cannot be prohibited by Congress, prior to the year one
      thousand eight hundred and eight.

      _Secondly._ That Congress have no authority to interfere in
      the emancipation of slaves, or in the treatment of them within
      any of the States; it remaining with the several States alone
      to provide any regulation therein, which humanity and true
      policy may require.

      _Thirdly._ That Congress have authority to restrain the
      citizens of the United States from carrying on the African
      trade, for the purpose of supplying foreigners with slaves,
      and of providing, by proper regulations, for the humane
      treatment, during their passage, of slaves imported by the
      said citizens into the States admitting such importation.

      _Fourthly._ That Congress have authority to prohibit
      foreigners from fitting out vessels in any port of the United
      States for transporting persons from Africa to any foreign
      port.


47. ~The Act of 1794.~ This declaration of the powers of the central
government over the slave-trade bore early fruit in the second Congress,
in the shape of a shower of petitions from abolition societies in
Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, Pennsylvania,
Maryland, and Virginia.[30] In some of these slavery was denounced as
"an outrageous violation of one of the most essential rights of human
nature,"[31] and the slave-trade as a traffic "degrading to the rights
of man" and "repugnant to reason."[32] Others declared the trade
"injurious to the true commercial interest of a nation,"[33] and asked
Congress that, having taken up the matter, they do all in their power to
limit the trade. Congress was, however, determined to avoid as long as
possible so unpleasant a matter, and, save an angry attempt to censure a
Quaker petitioner,[34] nothing was heard of the slave-trade until the
third Congress.

Meantime, news came from the seas southeast of Carolina and Georgia
which influenced Congress more powerfully than humanitarian arguments
had done. The wild revolt of despised slaves, the rise of a noble black
leader, and the birth of a new nation of Negro freemen frightened the
pro-slavery advocates and armed the anti-slavery agitation. As a result,
a Quaker petition for a law against the transport traffic in slaves was
received without a murmur in 1794,[35] and on March 22 the first
national act against the slave-trade became a law.[36] It was designed
"to prohibit the carrying on the Slave Trade from the United States to
any foreign place or country," or the fitting out of slavers in the
United States for that country. The penalties for violation were
forfeiture of the ship, a fine of $1000 for each person engaged, and of
$200 for each slave transported. If the Quakers thought this a triumph
of anti-slavery sentiment, they were quickly undeceived. Congress might
willingly restrain the country from feeding West Indian turbulence, and
yet be furious at a petition like that of 1797,[37] calling attention to
"the oppressed state of our brethren of the African race" in this
country, and to the interstate slave-trade. "Considering the present
extraordinary state of the West India Islands and of Europe," young John
Rutledge insisted "that 'sufficient for the day is the evil thereof,'
and that they ought to shut their door against any thing which had a
tendency to produce the like confusion in this country." After excited
debate and some investigation by a special committee, the petition was
ordered, in both Senate and House, to be withdrawn.


48. ~The Act of 1800.~ In the next Congress, the sixth, another petition
threw the House into paroxysms of slavery debate. Waln of Pennsylvania
presented the petition of certain free colored men of Pennsylvania
praying for a revision of the slave-trade laws and of the fugitive-slave
law, and for prospective emancipation.[38] Waln moved the reference of
this memorial to a committee already appointed on the revision of the
loosely drawn and poorly enforced Act of 1794.[39] Rutledge of South
Carolina immediately arose. He opposed the motion, saying, that these
petitions were continually coming in and stirring up discord; that it
was a good thing the Negroes were in slavery; and that already "too much
of this new-fangled French philosophy of liberty and equality" had found
its way among them. Others defended the right of petition, and declared
that none wished Congress to exceed its powers. Brown of Rhode Island, a
new figure in Congress, a man of distinguished services and from a
well-known family, boldly set forth the commercial philosophy of his
State. "We want money," said he, "we want a navy; we ought therefore to
use the means to obtain it. We ought to go farther than has yet been
proposed, and repeal the bills in question altogether, for why should we
see Great Britain getting all the slave trade to themselves; why may not
our country be enriched by that lucrative traffic? There would not be a
slave the more sold, but we should derive the benefits by importing from
Africa as well as that nation." Waln, in reply, contended that they
should look into "the slave trade, much of which was still carrying on
from Rhode Island, Boston and Pennsylvania." Hill of North Carolina
called the House back from this general discussion to the petition in
question, and, while willing to remedy any existing defect in the Act of
1794, hoped the petition would not be received. Dana of Connecticut
declared that the paper "contained nothing but a farrago of the French
metaphysics of liberty and equality;" and that "it was likely to produce
some of the dreadful scenes of St. Domingo." The next day Rutledge again
warned the House against even discussing the matter, as "very serious,
nay, dreadful effects, must be the inevitable consequence." He held up
the most lurid pictures of the fatuity of the French Convention in
listening to the overtures of the "three emissaries from St. Domingo,"
and thus yielding "one of the finest islands in the world" to "scenes
which had never been practised since the destruction of Carthage." "But,
sir," he continued, "we have lived to see these dreadful scenes. These
horrid effects have succeeded what was conceived once to be trifling.
Most important consequences may be the result, although gentlemen little
apprehend it. But we know the situation of things there, although they
do not, and knowing we deprecate it. There have been emissaries amongst
us in the Southern States; they have begun their war upon us; an actual
organization has commenced; we have had them meeting in their club
rooms, and debating on that subject.... Sir, I do believe that persons
have been sent from France to feel the pulse of this country, to know
whether these [i.e., the Negroes] are the proper engines to make use of:
these people have been talked to; they have been tampered with, and this
is going on."

Finally, after censuring certain parts of this Negro petition, Congress
committed the part on the slave-trade to the committee already
appointed. Meantime, the Senate sent down a bill to amend the Act of
1794, and the House took this bill under consideration.[40] Prolonged
debate ensued. Brown of Rhode Island again made a most elaborate plea
for throwing open the foreign slave-trade. Negroes, he said, bettered
their condition by being enslaved, and thus it was morally wrong and
commercially indefensible to impose "a heavy fine and imprisonment ...
for carrying on a trade so advantageous;" or, if the trade must be
stopped, then equalize the matter and abolish slavery too. Nichols of
Virginia thought that surely the gentlemen would not advise the
importation of more Negroes; for while it "was a fact, to be sure," that
they would thus improve their condition, "would it be policy so to do?"
Bayard of Delaware said that "a more dishonorable item of revenue" than
that derived from the slave-trade "could not be established." Rutledge
opposed the new bill as defective and impracticable: the former act, he
said, was enough; the States had stopped the trade, and in addition the
United States had sought to placate philanthropists by stopping the use
of our ships in the trade. "This was going very far indeed." New England
first began the trade, and why not let them enjoy its profits now as
well as the English? The trade could not be stopped.

The bill was eventually recommitted and reported again.[41] "On the
question for its passing, a long and warm debate ensued," and several
attempts to postpone it were made; it finally passed, however, only
Brown of Rhode Island, Dent of Maryland, Rutledge and Huger of South
Carolina, and Dickson of North Carolina voting against it, and 67 voting
for it.[42] This Act of May 10, 1800,[43] greatly strengthened the Act
of 1794. The earlier act had prohibited citizens from equipping slavers
for the foreign trade; but this went so far as to forbid them having any
interest, direct or indirect, in such voyages, or serving on board
slave-ships in any capacity. Imprisonment for two years was added to the
former fine of $2000, and United States commissioned ships were directed
to capture such slavers as prizes. The slaves though forfeited by the
owner, were not to go to the captor; and the act omitted to say what
disposition should be made of them.


49. ~The Act of 1803.~ The Haytian revolt, having been among the main
causes of two laws, soon was the direct instigation to a third. The
frightened feeling in the South, when freedmen from the West Indies
began to arrive in various ports, may well be imagined. On January 17,
1803, the town of Wilmington, North Carolina, hastily memorialized
Congress, stating the arrival of certain freed Negroes from Guadeloupe,
and apprehending "much danger to the peace and safety of the people of
the Southern States of the Union" from the "admission of persons of that
description into the United States."[44] The House committee which
considered this petition hastened to agree "That the system of policy
stated in the said memorial to exist, and to be now pursued in the
French colonial government, of the West Indies, is fraught with danger
to the peace and safety of the United States. That the fact stated to
have occurred in the prosecution of that system of policy, demands the
prompt interference of the Government of the United States, as well
Legislative as Executive."[45] The result was a bill providing for the
forfeiture of any ship which should bring into States prohibiting the
same "any negro, mulatto, or other person of color;" the captain of the
ship was also to be punished. After some opposition[46] the bill became
a law, February 28, 1803.[47]


50. ~State of the Slave-Trade from 1789 to 1803.~ Meantime, in spite of
the prohibitory State laws, the African slave-trade to the United States
continued to flourish. It was notorious that New England traders carried
on a large traffic.[48] Members stated on the floor of the House that
"it was much to be regretted that the severe and pointed statute against
the slave trade had been so little regarded. In defiance of its
forbiddance and its penalties, it was well known that citizens and
vessels of the United States were still engaged in that traffic.... In
various parts of the nation, outfits were made for slave-voyages,
without secrecy, shame, or apprehension.... Countenanced by their
fellow-citizens at home, who were as ready to buy as they themselves
were to collect and to bring to market, they approached our Southern
harbors and inlets, and clandestinely disembarked the sooty offspring of
the Eastern, upon the ill fated soil of the Western hemisphere. In this
way, it had been computed that, during the last twelve months, twenty
thousand enslaved negroes had been transported from Guinea, and, by
smuggling, added to the plantation stock of Georgia and South Carolina.
So little respect seems to have been paid to the existing prohibitory
statute, that it may almost be considered as disregarded by common
consent."[49]

These voyages were generally made under the flag of a foreign nation,
and often the vessel was sold in a foreign port to escape confiscation.
South Carolina's own Congressman confessed that although the State had
prohibited the trade since 1788, she "was unable to enforce" her laws.
"With navigable rivers running into the heart of it," said he, "it was
impossible, with our means, to prevent our Eastern brethren, who, in
some parts of the Union, in defiance of the authority of the General
Government, have been engaged in this trade, from introducing them into
the country. The law was completely evaded, and, for the last year or
two [1802-3], Africans were introduced into the country in numbers
little short, I believe, of what they would have been had the trade been
a legal one."[50] The same tale undoubtedly might have been told of
Georgia.


51. ~The South Carolina Repeal of 1803.~ This vast and apparently
irrepressible illicit traffic was one of three causes which led South
Carolina, December 17, 1803, to throw aside all pretence and legalize
her growing slave-trade; the other two causes were the growing certainty
of total prohibition of the traffic in 1808, and the recent purchase of
Louisiana by the United States, with its vast prospective demand for
slave labor. Such a combination of advantages, which meant fortunes to
planters and Charleston slave-merchants, could not longer be withheld
from them; the prohibition was repealed, and the United States became
again, for the first time in at least five years, a legal slave mart.
This action shocked the nation, frightening Southern States with visions
of an influx of untrained barbarians and servile insurrections, and
arousing and intensifying the anti-slavery feeling of the North, which
had long since come to think of the trade, so far as legal enactment
went, as a thing of the past.

Scarcely a month after this repeal, Bard of Pennsylvania solemnly
addressed Congress on the matter. "For many reasons," said he, "this
House must have been justly surprised by a recent measure of one of the
Southern States. The impressions, however, which that measure gave my
mind, were deep and painful. Had I been informed that some formidable
foreign Power had invaded our country, I would not, I ought not, be more
alarmed than on hearing that South Carolina had repealed her law
prohibiting the importation of slaves.... Our hands are tied, and we are
obliged to stand confounded, while we see the flood-gate opened, and
pouring incalculable miseries into our country."[51] He then moved, as
the utmost legal measure, a tax of ten dollars per head on slaves
imported.

Debate on this proposition did not occur until February 14, when Lowndes
explained the circumstances of the repeal, and a long controversy took
place.[52] Those in favor of the tax argued that the trade was wrong,
and that the tax would serve as some slight check; the tax was not
inequitable, for if a State did not wish to bear it she had only to
prohibit the trade; the tax would add to the revenue, and be at the same
time a moral protest against an unjust and dangerous traffic. Against
this it was argued that if the tax furnished a revenue it would defeat
its own object, and make prohibition more difficult in 1808; it was
inequitable, because it was aimed against one State, and would fall
exclusively on agriculture; it would give national sanction to the
trade; it would look "like an attempt in the General Government to
correct a State for the undisputed exercise of its constitutional
powers;" the revenue would be inconsiderable, and the United States had
nothing to do with the moral principle; while a prohibitory tax would be
defensible, a small tax like this would be useless as a protection and
criminal as a revenue measure.

The whole debate hinged on the expediency of the measure, few defending
South Carolina's action.[53] Finally, a bill was ordered to be brought
in, which was done on the 17th.[54] Another long debate took place,
covering substantially the same ground. It was several times hinted that
if the matter were dropped South Carolina might again prohibit the
trade. This, and the vehement opposition, at last resulted in the
postponement of the bill, and it was not heard from again during the
session.


52. ~The Louisiana Slave-Trade, 1803-1805.~ About this time the cession
of Louisiana brought before Congress the question of the status of
slavery and the slave-trade in the Territories. Twice or thrice before
had the subject called for attention. The first time was in the Congress
of the Confederation, when, by the Ordinance of 1787,[55] both slavery
and the slave-trade were excluded from the Northwest Territory. In 1790
Congress had accepted the cession of North Carolina back lands on the
express condition that slavery there be undisturbed.[56] Nothing had
been said as to slavery in the South Carolina cession (1787),[57] but it
was tacitly understood that the provision of the Northwest Ordinance
would not be applied. In 1798 the bill introduced for the cession of
Mississippi contained a specific declaration that the anti-slavery
clause of 1787 should not be included.[58] The bill passed the Senate,
but caused long and excited debate in the House.[59] It was argued, on
the one hand, that the case in Mississippi was different from that in
the Northwest Territory, because slavery was a legal institution in all
the surrounding country, and to prohibit the institution was virtually
to prohibit the settling of the country. On the other hand, Gallatin
declared that if this amendment should not obtain, "he knew not how
slaves could be prevented from being introduced by way of New Orleans,
by persons who are not citizens of the United States." It was moved to
strike out the excepting clause; but the motion received only twelve
votes,--an apparent indication that Congress either did not appreciate
the great precedent it was establishing, or was reprehensibly careless.
Harper of South Carolina then succeeded in building up the Charleston
slave-trade interest by a section forbidding the slave traffic from
"without the limits of the United States." Thatcher moved to strike out
the last clause of this amendment, and thus to prohibit the interstate
trade, but he failed to get a second.[60] Thus the act passed, punishing
the introduction of slaves from without the country by a fine of $300
for each slave, and freeing the slave.[61]

In 1804 President Jefferson communicated papers to Congress on the
status of slavery and the slave-trade in Louisiana.[62] The Spanish had
allowed the traffic by edict in 1793, France had not stopped it, and
Governor Claiborne had refrained from interference. A bill erecting a
territorial government was already pending.[63] The Northern "District
of Louisiana" was placed under the jurisdiction of Indiana Territory,
and was made subject to the provisions of the Ordinance of 1787. Various
attempts were made to amend the part of the bill referring to the
Southern Territory: first, so as completely to prohibit the
slave-trade;[64] then to compel the emancipation at a certain age of all
those imported;[65] next, to confine all importation to that from the
States;[66] and, finally, to limit it further to slaves imported before
South Carolina opened her ports.[67] The last two amendments prevailed,
and the final act also extended to the Territory the Acts of 1794 and
1803. Only slaves imported before May 1, 1798, could be introduced, and
those must be slaves of actual settlers.[68] All slaves illegally
imported were freed.

This stringent act was limited to one year. The next year, in accordance
with the urgent petition of the inhabitants, a bill was introduced
against these restrictions.[69] By dexterous wording, this bill, which
became a law March 2, 1805,[70] swept away all restrictions upon the
slave-trade except that relating to foreign ports, and left even this
provision so ambiguous that, later, by judicial interpretation of the
law,[71] the foreign slave-trade was allowed, at least for a time.

Such a stream of slaves now poured into the new Territory that the
following year a committee on the matter was appointed by the House.[72]
The committee reported that they "are in possession of the fact, that
African slaves, lately imported into Charleston, have been thence
conveyed into the territory of Orleans, and, in their opinion, this
practice will be continued to a very great extent, while there is no law
to prevent it."[73] The House ordered a bill checking this to be
prepared; and such a bill was reported, but was soon dropped.[74]
Importations into South Carolina during this time reached enormous
proportions. Senator Smith of that State declared from official returns
that, between 1803 and 1807, 39,075 Negroes were imported into
Charleston, most of whom went to the Territories.[75]


53. ~Last Attempts at Taxation, 1805-1806.~ So alarming did the trade
become that North Carolina passed a resolution in December, 1804,[76]
proposing that the States give Congress power to prohibit the trade.
Massachusetts,[77] Vermont,[78] New Hampshire,[79] and Maryland[80]
responded; and a joint resolution was introduced in the House, proposing
as an amendment to the Constitution "That the Congress of the United
States shall have power to prevent the further importation of slaves
into the United States and the Territories thereof."[81] Nothing came
of this effort; but meantime the project of taxation was revived. A
motion to this effect, made in February, 1805, was referred to a
Committee of the Whole, but was not discussed. Early in the first
session of the ninth Congress the motion of 1805 was renewed; and
although again postponed on the assurance that South Carolina was about
to stop the trade,[82] it finally came up for debate January 20,
1806.[83] Then occurred a most stubborn legislative battle, which lasted
during the whole session.[84] Several amendments to the motion were
first introduced, so as to make it apply to all immigrants, and again to
all "persons of color." As in the former debate, it was proposed to
substitute a resolution of censure on South Carolina. All these
amendments were lost. A long debate on the expediency of the measure
followed, on the old grounds. Early of Georgia dwelt especially on the
double taxation it would impose on Georgia; others estimated that a
revenue of one hundred thousand dollars might be derived from the tax, a
sum sufficient to replace the tax on pepper and medicines. Angry charges
and counter-charges were made,--e.g., that Georgia, though ashamed
openly to avow the trade, participated in it as well as South Carolina.
"Some recriminations ensued between several members, on the
participation of the traders of some of the New England States in
carrying on the slave trade." Finally, January 22, by a vote of 90 to
25, a tax bill was ordered to be brought in.[85] One was reported on the
27th.[86] Every sort of opposition was resorted to. On the one hand,
attempts were made to amend it so as to prohibit importation after 1807,
and to prevent importation into the Territories; on the other hand,
attempts were made to recommit and postpone the measure. It finally got
a third reading, but was recommitted to a select committee, and
disappeared until February 14.[87] Being then amended so as to provide
for the forfeiture of smuggled cargoes, but saying nothing as to the
disposition of the slaves, it was again relegated to a committee, after
a vote of 69 to 42 against postponement.[88] On March 4 it appeared
again, and a motion to reject it was lost. Finally, in the midst of the
war scare and the question of non-importation of British goods, the bill
was apparently forgotten, and the last attempt to tax imported slaves
ended, like the others, in failure.


54. ~Key-Note of the Period.~ One of the last acts of this period
strikes again the key-note which sounded throughout the whole of it. On
February 20, 1806, after considerable opposition, a bill to prohibit
trade with San Domingo passed the Senate.[89] In the House it was
charged by one side that the measure was dictated by France, and by the
other, that it originated in the fear of countenancing Negro
insurrection. The bill, however, became a law, and by continuations
remained on the statute-books until 1809. Even at that distance the
nightmare of the Haytian insurrection continued to haunt the South, and
a proposal to reopen trade with the island caused wild John Randolph to
point out the "dreadful evil" of a "direct trade betwixt the town of
Charleston and the ports of the island of St. Domingo."[90]

Of the twenty years from 1787 to 1807 it can only be said that they
were, on the whole, a period of disappointment so far as the suppression
of the slave-trade was concerned. Fear, interest, and philanthropy
united for a time in an effort which bade fair to suppress the trade;
then the real weakness of the constitutional compromise appeared, and
the interests of the few overcame the fears and the humanity of the
many.


FOOTNOTES:

  [1] Prince, _Digest of the Laws of Georgia_, p. 786; Marbury
      and Crawford, _Digest of the Laws of Georgia_, pp. 440, 442.
      The exact text of this act appears not to be extant. Section
      I. is stated to have been "re-enacted by the constitution."
      Possibly this act prohibited slaves also, although this is not
      certain. Georgia passed several regulative acts between 1755
      and 1793. Cf. Renne, _Colonial Acts of Georgia_, pp. 73-4,
      164, note.

  [2] Marbury and Crawford, _Digest_, p. 30, Â§ 11. The clause
      was penned by Peter J. Carnes of Jefferson. Cf. W.B. Stevens,
      _History of Georgia_ (1847), II. 501.

  [3] GrimkÃ©, _Public Laws_, p. 466.

  [4] Cooper and McCord, _Statutes_, VII. 431.

  [5] _Ibid._, VII. 433-6, 444, 447.

  [6] _Ibid._, VII. 449.

  [7] Martin, _Iredell's Acts of Assembly_, I. 492.

  [8] _Ibid._, II. 53.

  [9] Cf. _Ibid._, II. 94; _Laws of North Carolina_ (revision of
      1819), I. 786.

 [10] Virginia codified her whole slave legislation in 1792
      (_Va. Statutes at Large_, New Ser., I. 122), and amended her
      laws in 1798 and 1806 (_Ibid._, III. 251).

 [11] Dorsey, _Laws of Maryland, 1796_, I. 334.

 [12] _Laws of Delaware, 1797_ (Newcastle ed.), p. 942, ch. 194 b.

 [13] Dallas, _Laws_, II. 586.

 [14] Paterson, _Digest of the Laws of New Jersey_ (1800), pp.
      307-13. In 1804 New Jersey passed an act gradually to abolish
      slavery. The legislation of New York at this period was
      confined to regulating the exportation of slave criminals
      (1790), and to passing an act gradually abolishing slavery
      (1799). In 1801 she codified all her acts.

 [15] _Acts and Laws of Connecticut_ (ed. 1784), pp. 368, 369, 388.

 [16] _Ibid._, p. 412.

 [17] _Perpetual Laws of Massachusetts, 1780-89_, pp. 235-6.

 [18] _Queries Respecting Slavery_, etc., in _Mass. Hist. Soc.
      Coll._, 1st Ser., IV. 205.

 [19] _Annals of Cong._, 1 Cong, 1 sess. pp. 336-41.

 [20] _Annals of Cong._, 1 Cong. 1 sess. p. 903.

 [21] _Ibid._, 1 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 1182-3.

 [22] _Journals of Cong., 1782-3_, pp. 418-9. Cf. above, pp.
      56-57.

 [23] _Annals of Cong._, 1 Cong. 2 sess. p. 1184.

 [24] _Ibid._, pp. 1182-91.

 [25] _Annals of Cong._, 1 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 1197-1205.

 [26] _House Journal_ (repr. 1826), 1 Cong. 2 sess. I. 157-8.

 [27] _Annals of Cong._, I Cong. 2 sess. pp. 1413-7.

 [28] For the reports and debates, cf. _Annals of Cong._, 1
      Cong. 2 sess. pp. 1413-7, 1450-74; _House Journal_ (repr.
      1826), 1 Cong. 2 sess. I. 168-81.

 [29] A clerical error in the original: "interdict" and
      "regulate" should be interchanged.

 [30] See _Memorials presented to Congress_, etc. (1792),
      published by the Pennsylvania Abolition Society.

 [31] From the Virginia petition.

 [32] From the petition of Baltimore and other Maryland
      societies.

 [33] From the Providence Abolition Society's petition.

 [34] _House Journal_ (repr. 1826), 2 Cong. 2 sess. I. 627-9;
      _Annals of Cong._, 2 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 728-31.

 [35] _Annals of Cong._, 3 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 64, 70, 72; _House
      Journal_ (repr. 1826), 3 Cong. 1 sess. II. 76, 84-5, 96-100;
      _Senate Journal_ (repr. 1820), 3 Cong. 1 sess. II. 51.

 [36] _Statutes at Large_, I. 347-9.

 [37] _Annals of Cong._, 5 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 656-70, 945-1033.

 [38] _Annals of Cong._, 6 Cong. 1 sess. p. 229.

 [39] Dec. 12, 1799: _House Journal_ (repr. 1826), 6 Cong. 1
      sess. III. 535. For the debate, see _Annals of Cong._, 6 Cong.
      1 sess. pp. 230-45.

 [40] _Senate Journal_ (repr. 1821), 6 Cong. 1 sess. III. 72,
      77, 88, 92; see _Ibid._, Index, Bill No. 62; _House Journal_
      (repr. 1826), 6 Cong. 1 sess. III., Index, House Bill No. 247.
      For the debate, see _Annals of Cong._, 6 Cong. 1 sess. pp.
      686-700.

 [41] _Annals of Cong._, 6 Cong. 1 sess. p. 697.

 [42] _Ibid._, p. 699-700.

 [43] _Statutes at Large_, II. 70.

 [44] _Annals of Cong._, 7 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 385-6.

 [45] _Ibid._, p. 424.

 [46] See House Bills Nos. 89 and 101; _Annals of Cong._, 7
      Cong. 2 sess. pp. 424, 459-67. For the debate, see _Ibid._,
      pp. 459-72.

 [47] _Statutes at Large_, II. 205.

 [48] Cf. Fowler, _Local Law in Massachusetts and Connecticut_,
      etc., p. 126.

 [49] Speech of S.L. Mitchell of New York, Feb. 14, 1804:
      _Annals of Cong._, 8 Cong. 1 sess. p. 1000. Cf. also speech of
      Bedinger: _Ibid._, pp. 997-8.

 [50] Speech of Lowndes in the House, Feb. 14, 1804: _Annals of
      Cong._, 8 Cong., 1 sess. p. 992. Cf. Stanton's speech later:
      _Ibid._, 9 Cong. 2 sess. p. 240.

 [51] _Annals of Cong._, 8 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 820, 876.

 [52] _Ibid._, pp. 992-1036.

 [53] Huger of South Carolina declared that the whole South
      Carolina Congressional delegation opposed the repeal of the
      law, although they maintained the State's right to do so if
      she chose: _Annals of Cong._, 8 Cong. 1 sess. p. 1005.

 [54] _Ibid._, pp. 1020-36; _House Journal_ (repr. 1826), 8
      Cong. 1 sess. IV 523, 578, 580, 581-5.

 [55] On slavery in the Territories, cf. Welling, in _Report
      Amer. Hist. Assoc._, 1891, pp. 133-60.

 [56] _Statutes at Large_, I. 108.

 [57] _Journals of Cong._, XII. 137-8.

 [58] _Annals of Cong._, 5 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 511, 515, 532-3.

 [59] _Ibid._, 5 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 1235, 1249, 1277-84,
      1296-1313.

 [60] _Annals of Cong._, 5 Cong. 2 sess. p. 1313.

 [61] _Statutes at Large_, I. 549.

 [62] _Amer. State Papers, Miscellaneous_, I. No. 177.

 [63] _Annals of Cong._, 8 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 106, 211, 223,
      231, 233-4, 238.

 [64] _Ibid._, pp. 240, 1186.

 [65] _Ibid._, p. 241.

 [66] _Ibid._, p. 240.

 [67] _Ibid._, p. 242.

 [68] For further proceedings, see _Annals of Cong._, 8 Cong. 1
      sess. pp. 240-55, 1038-79, 1128-9, 1185-9. For the law, see
      _Statutes at Large_, II. 283-9.

 [69] First, a bill was introduced applying the Northwest
      Ordinance to the Territory (_Annals of Cong._, 8 Cong. 2 sess.
      pp. 45-6); but this was replaced by a Senate bill (_Ibid._, p.
      68; _Senate Journal_, repr. 1821, 8 Cong. 2 sess. III. 464).
      For the petition of the inhabitants, see _Annals of Cong._, 8
      Cong. 2 sess. p. 727-8.

 [70] The bill was hurried through, and there are no records of
      debate. Cf. _Annals of Cong._, 8 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 28-69, 727,
      871, 957, 1016-20, 1213-5. In _Senate Journal_ (repr. 1821),
      III., see Index, Bill No. 8. Importation of slaves was allowed
      by a clause erecting a Frame of Government "similar" to that
      of the Mississippi Territory.

 [71] _Annals of Cong._, 9 Cong. 1 sess. p. 443. The whole
      trade was practically foreign, for the slavers merely entered
      the Negroes at Charleston and immediately reshipped them to
      New Orleans. Cf. _Annals of Cong._, 16 Cong. 1 sess. p. 264.

 [72] _House Journal_ (repr. 1826), 9 Cong. 1 sess. V. 264;
      _Annals of Cong._, 9 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 445, 878.

 [73] _House Reports_, 9 Cong. 1 sess. Feb. 17, 1806.

 [74] House Bill No. 123.

 [75] _Annals of Cong._, 16 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 73-7. This report
      covers the time from Jan. 1, 1804, to Dec. 31, 1807. During
      that time the following was the number of ships engaged in the
      traffic:--

      From Charleston,   61    From Connecticut,    1
        "  Rhode Island, 59      "  Sweden,         1
        "  Baltimore,     4      "  Great Britain, 70
        "  Boston,        1      "  France,         3
        "  Norfolk,       2                       202

      The consignees of these slave ships were natives of
        Charleston             13
        Rhode Island           88
        Great Britain          91
        France                 10
                             ----
                              202

      The following slaves were imported:--
        By British vessels        19,949
        "  French    "             1,078
                                  ------
                                                21,027

        By American vessels:--
        "  Charleston merchants    2,006
        "  Rhode Island   "        7,958
        "  Foreign        "        5,717
        "  other Northern "          930
        "    "   Southern "        1,437        18,048
                                  ------        ------

      Total number of slaves imported, 1804-7   39,075

      It is, of course, highly probable that the Custom House
      returns were much below the actual figures.

 [76] McMaster, _History of the People of the United States_,
      III. p. 517.

 [77] _House Journal_ (repr. 1826), 8 Cong. 2 sess. V. 171;
      _Mass. Resolves_, May, 1802, to March, 1806, Vol. II. A.
      (State House ed., p. 239).

 [78] _House Journal_ (repr. 1826), 9 Cong. 1 sess. V. 238.

 [79] _Ibid._, V. 266.

 [80] _Senate Journal_ (repr. 1821), 9 Cong. 1 sess. IV. 76,
      77, 79.

 [81] _House Journal_ (repr. 1826), 8 Cong. 2 sess. V. 171.

 [82] _Annals of Cong._, 9 Cong. 1 sess. p. 274.

 [83] _Ibid._, pp. 272-4, 323.

 [84] _Ibid._, pp. 346-52, 358-75, etc., to 520.

 [85] _Ibid._, pp. 374-5.

 [86] See House Bill No. 94.

 [87] _Annals of Cong._, 9 Cong. 1 sess. p. 466.

 [88] _Annals of Cong._, 9 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 519-20.

 [89] _Ibid._, pp. 21, 52, 75, etc., to 138, 485-515, 1228. See
      House Bill No. 168. Cf. _Statutes at Large_, II. 421-2.

 [90] A few months later, at the expiration of the period,
      trade was quietly reopened. _Annals of Cong._, 11 Cong. 1
      sess. pp. 443-6.

                    *       *       *       *       *




_Chapter VIII_

THE PERIOD OF ATTEMPTED SUPPRESSION. 1807-1825.

  55. The Act of 1807.
  56. The First Question: How shall illegally imported Africans be
        disposed of?
  57. The Second Question: How shall Violations be punished?
  58. The Third Question: How shall the Interstate Coastwise Slave-Trade
        be protected?
  59. Legislative History of the Bill.
  60. Enforcement of the Act.
  61. Evidence of the Continuance of the Trade.
  62. Apathy of the Federal Government.
  63. Typical Cases.
  64. The Supplementary Acts, 1818-1820.
  65. Enforcement of the Supplementary Acts, 1818-1825.


55. ~The Act of 1807.~ The first great goal of anti-slavery effort in
the United States had been, since the Revolution, the suppression of the
slave-trade by national law. It would hardly be too much to say that the
Haytian revolution, in addition to its influence in the years from 1791
to 1806, was one of the main causes that rendered the accomplishment of
this aim possible at the earliest constitutional moment. To the great
influence of the fears of the South was added the failure of the French
designs on Louisiana, of which Toussaint L'Ouverture was the most
probable cause. The cession of Louisiana in 1803 challenged and aroused
the North on the slavery question again; put the Carolina and Georgia
slave-traders in the saddle, to the dismay of the Border States; and
brought the whole slave-trade question vividly before the public
conscience. Another scarcely less potent influence was, naturally, the
great anti-slavery movement in England, which after a mighty struggle of
eighteen years was about to gain its first victory in the British Act of
1807.

President Jefferson, in his pacificatory message of December 2, 1806,
said: "I congratulate you, fellow-citizens, on the approach of the
period at which you may interpose your authority constitutionally, to
withdraw the citizens of the United States from all further
participation in those violations of human rights which have been so
long continued on the unoffending inhabitants of Africa, and which the
morality, the reputation, and the best interests of our country, have
long been eager to proscribe. Although no law you may pass can take
prohibitory effect till the first day of the year one thousand eight
hundred and eight, yet the intervening period is not too long to
prevent, by timely notice, expeditions which cannot be completed before
that day."[1]

In pursuance of this recommendation, the very next day Senator Bradley
of Vermont introduced into the Senate a bill which, after a complicated
legislative history, became the Act of March 2, 1807, prohibiting the
African slave-trade.[2]

Three main questions were to be settled by this bill: first, and most
prominent, that of the disposal of illegally imported Africans; second,
that of the punishment of those concerned in the importation; third,
that of the proper limitation of the interstate traffic by water.

The character of the debate on these three questions, as well as the
state of public opinion, is illustrated by the fact that forty of the
sixty pages of officially reported debates are devoted to the first
question, less than twenty to the second, and only two to the third. A
sad commentary on the previous enforcement of State and national laws is
the readiness with which it was admitted that wholesale violations of
the law would take place; indeed, Southern men declared that no strict
law against the slave-trade could be executed in the South, and that it
was only by playing on the motives of personal interest that the trade
could be checked. The question of punishment indicated the slowly
changing moral attitude of the South toward the slave system. Early
boldly said, "A large majority of people in the Southern States do not
consider slavery as even an evil."[3] The South, in fact, insisted on
regarding man-stealing as a minor offence, a "misdemeanor" rather than a
"crime." Finally, in the short and sharp debate on the interstate
coastwise trade, the growing economic side of the slavery question came
to the front, the vested interests' argument was squarely put, and the
future interstate trade almost consciously provided for.

From these considerations, it is doubtful as to how far it was expected
that the Act of 1807 would check the slave traffic; at any rate, so far
as the South was concerned, there seemed to be an evident desire to
limit the trade, but little thought that this statute would definitively
suppress it.

56. ~The First Question: How shall illegally imported Africans be
disposed of?~ The dozen or more propositions on the question of the
disposal of illegally imported Africans may be divided into two chief
heads, representing two radically opposed parties: 1. That illegally
imported Africans be free, although they might be indentured for a term
of years or removed from the country. 2. That such Africans be sold as
slaves.[4] The arguments on these two propositions, which were many and
far-reaching, may be roughly divided into three classes, political,
constitutional, and moral.

The political argument, reduced to its lowest terms, ran thus: those
wishing to free the Negroes illegally imported declared that to enslave
them would be to perpetrate the very evil which the law was designed to
stop. "By the same law," they said, "we condemn the man-stealer and
become the receivers of his stolen goods. We punish the criminal, and
then step into his place, and complete the crime."[5] They said that the
objection to free Negroes was no valid excuse; for if the Southern
people really feared this class, they would consent to the imposing of
such penalties on illicit traffic as would stop the importation of a
single slave.[6] Moreover, "forfeiture" and sale of the Negroes implied
a property right in them which did not exist.[7] Waiving this technical
point, and allowing them to be "forfeited" to the government, then the
government should either immediately set them free, or, at the most,
indenture them for a term of years; otherwise, the law would be an
encouragement to violators. "It certainly will be," said they, "if the
importer can find means to evade the penalty of the act; for there he
has all the advantage of a market enhanced by our ineffectual attempt to
prohibit."[8] They claimed that even the indenturing of the ignorant
barbarian for life was better than slavery; and Sloan declared that the
Northern States would receive the freed Negroes willingly rather than
have them enslaved.[9]

The argument of those who insisted that the Negroes should be sold was
tersely put by Macon: "In adopting our measures on this subject, we must
pass such a law as can be executed."[10] Early expanded this: "It is a
principle in legislation, as correct as any which has ever prevailed,
that to give effect to laws you must not make them repugnant to the
passions and wishes of the people among whom they are to operate. How
then, in this instance, stands the fact? Do not gentlemen from every
quarter of the Union prove, on the discussion of every question that has
ever arisen in the House, having the most remote bearing on the giving
freedom to the Africans in the bosom of our country, that it has excited
the deepest sensibility in the breasts of those where slavery exists?
And why is this so? It is, because those who, from experience, know the
extent of the evil, believe that the most formidable aspect in which it
can present itself, is by making these people free among them. Yes, sir,
though slavery is an evil, regretted by every man in the country, to
have among us in any considerable quantity persons of this description,
is an evil far greater than slavery itself. Does any gentleman want
proof of this? I answer that all proof is useless; no fact can be more
notorious. With this belief on the minds of the people where slavery
exists, and where the importation will take place, if at all, we are
about to turn loose in a state of freedom all persons brought in after
the passage of this law. I ask gentlemen to reflect and say whether such
a law, opposed to the ideas, the passions, the views, and the affections
of the people of the Southern States, can be executed? I tell them, no;
it is impossible--why? Because no man will inform--why? Because to
inform will be to lead to an evil which will be deemed greater than the
offence of which information is given, because it will be opposed to the
principle of self-preservation, and to the love of family. No, no man
will be disposed to jeopard his life, and the lives of his countrymen.
And if no one dare inform, the whole authority of the Government cannot
carry the law into effect. The whole people will rise up against it.
Why? Because to enforce it would be to turn loose, in the bosom of the
country, firebrands that would consume them."[11]

This was the more tragic form of the argument; it also had a mercenary
side, which was presented with equal emphasis. It was repeatedly said
that the only way to enforce the law was to play off individual
interests against each other. The profit from the sale of illegally
imported Negroes was declared to be the only sufficient "inducement to
give information of their importation."[12] "Give up the idea of
forfeiture, and I challenge the gentleman to invent fines, penalties, or
punishments of any sort, sufficient to restrain the slave trade."[13]
If such Negroes be freed, "I tell you that slaves will continue to be
imported as heretofore.... You cannot get hold of the ships employed in
this traffic. Besides, slaves will be brought into Georgia from East
Florida. They will be brought into the Mississippi Territory from the
bay of Mobile. You cannot inflict any other penalty, or devise any other
adequate means of prevention, than a forfeiture of the Africans in whose
possession they may be found after importation."[14] Then, too, when
foreigners smuggled in Negroes, "who then ... could be operated on, but
the purchasers? There was the rub--it was their interest alone which, by
being operated on, would produce a check. Snap their purse-strings,
break open their strong box, deprive them of their slaves, and by
destroying the temptation to buy, you put an end to the trade, ...
nothing short of a forfeiture of the slave would afford an effectual
remedy."[15] Again, it was argued that it was impossible to prevent
imported Negroes from becoming slaves, or, what was just as bad, from
being sold as vagabonds or indentured for life.[16] Even our own laws,
it was said, recognize the title of the African slave factor in the
transported Negroes; and if the importer have no title, why do we
legislate? Why not let the African immigrant alone to get on as he may,
just as we do the Irish immigrant?[17] If he should be returned to
Africa, his home could not be found, and he would in all probability be
sold into slavery again.[18]

The constitutional argument was not urged as seriously as the foregoing;
but it had a considerable place. On the one hand, it was urged that if
the Negroes were forfeited, they were forfeited to the United States
government, which could dispose of them as it saw fit;[19] on the other
hand, it was said that the United States, as owner, was subject to State
laws, and could not free the Negroes contrary to such laws.[20] Some
alleged that the freeing of such Negroes struck at the title to all
slave property;[21] others thought that, as property in slaves was not
recognized in the Constitution, it could not be in a statute.[22] The
question also arose as to the source of the power of Congress over the
slave-trade. Southern men derived it from the clause on commerce, and
declared that it exceeded the power of Congress to declare Negroes
imported into a slave State, free, against the laws of that State; that
Congress could not determine what should or should not be property in a
State.[23] Northern men replied that, according to this principle,
forfeiture and sale in Massachusetts would be illegal; that the power of
Congress over the trade was derived from the restraining clause, as a
non-existent power could not be restrained; and that the United States
could act under her general powers as executor of the Law of
Nations.[24]

The moral argument as to the disposal of illegally imported Negroes was
interlarded with all the others. On the one side, it began with the
"Rights of Man," and descended to a stickling for the decent appearance
of the statute-book; on the other side, it began with the uplifting of
the heathen, and descended to a denial of the applicability of moral
principles to the question. Said Holland of North Carolina: "It is
admitted that the condition of the slaves in the Southern States is much
superior to that of those in Africa. Who, then, will say that the trade
is immoral?"[25] But, in fact, "morality has nothing to do with this
traffic,"[26] for, as Joseph Clay declared, "it must appear to every man
of common sense, that the question could be considered in a commercial
point of view only."[27] The other side declared that, "by the laws of
God and man," these captured Negroes are "entitled to their freedom as
clearly and absolutely as we are;"[28] nevertheless, some were willing
to leave them to the tender mercies of the slave States, so long as the
statute-book was disgraced by no explicit recognition of slavery.[29]
Such arguments brought some sharp sarcasm on those who seemed anxious
"to legislate for the honor and glory of the statute book;"[30] some
desired "to know what honor you will derive from a law that will be
broken every day of your lives."[31] They would rather boldly sell the
Negroes and turn the proceeds over to charity.

The final settlement of the question was as follows:--

    "SECTION 4.... And neither the importer, nor any person
    or persons claiming from or under him, shall hold any right or
    title whatsoever to any negro, mulatto, or person of color, nor
    to the service or labor thereof, who may be imported or brought
    within the United States, or territories thereof, in violation
    of this law, but the same shall remain subject to any
    regulations not contravening the provisions of this act, which
    the Legislatures of the several States or Territories at any
    time hereafter may make, for disposing of any such negro,
    mulatto, or person of color."[32]


57. ~The Second Question: How shall Violations be punished?~ The next
point in importance was that of the punishment of offenders. The
half-dozen specific propositions reduce themselves to two: 1. A
violation should be considered a crime or felony, and be punished by
death; 2. A violation should be considered a misdemeanor, and be
punished by fine and imprisonment.[33]

Advocates of the severer punishment dwelt on the enormity of the
offence. It was "one of the highest crimes man could commit," and "a
captain of a ship engaged in this traffic was guilty of murder."[34] The
law of God punished the crime with death, and any one would rather be
hanged than be enslaved.[35] It was a peculiarly deliberate crime, in
which the offender did not act in sudden passion, but had ample time for
reflection.[36] Then, too, crimes of much less magnitude are punished
with death. Shall we punish the stealer of $50 with death, and the
man-stealer with imprisonment only?[37] Piracy, forgery, and fraudulent
sinking of vessels are punishable with death, "yet these are crimes only
against property; whereas the importation of slaves, a crime committed
against the liberty of man, and inferior only to murder or treason, is
accounted nothing but a misdemeanor."[38] Here, indeed, lies the remedy
for the evil of freeing illegally imported Negroes,--in making the
penalty so severe that none will be brought in; if the South is sincere,
"they will unite to a man to execute the law."[39] To free such Negroes
is dangerous; to enslave them, wrong; to return them, impracticable; to
indenture them, difficult,--therefore, by a death penalty, keep them
from being imported.[40] Here the East had a chance to throw back the
taunts of the South, by urging the South to unite with them in hanging
the New England slave-traders, assuring the South that "so far from
charging their Southern brethren with cruelty or severity in hanging
them, they would acknowledge the favor with gratitude."[41] Finally, if
the Southerners would refuse to execute so severe a law because they did
not consider the offence great, they would probably refuse to execute
any law at all for the same reason.[42]

The opposition answered that the death penalty was more than
proportionate to the crime, and therefore "immoral."[43] "I cannot
believe," said Stanton of Rhode Island, "that a man ought to be hung for
only stealing a negro."[44] It was argued that the trade was after all
but a "transfer from one master to another;"[45] that slavery was worse
than the slave-trade, and the South did not consider slavery a crime:
how could it then punish the trade so severely and not reflect on the
institution?[46] Severity, it was said, was also inexpedient: severity
often increases crime; if the punishment is too great, people will
sympathize with offenders and will not inform against them. Said Mr.
Mosely: "When the penalty is excessive or disproportioned to the
offence, it will naturally create a repugnance to the law, and render
its execution odious."[47] John Randolph argued against even fine and
imprisonment, "on the ground that such an excessive penalty could not,
in such case, be constitutionally imposed by a Government possessed of
the limited powers of the Government of the United States."[48]

The bill as passed punished infractions as follows:--

    For equipping a slaver, a fine of $20,000 and forfeiture of the
    ship.

    For transporting Negroes, a fine of $5000 and forfeiture of the
    ship and Negroes.

    For transporting and selling Negroes, a fine of $1000 to
    $10,000, imprisonment from 5 to 10 years, and forfeiture of the
    ship and Negroes.

    For knowingly buying illegally imported Negroes, a fine of $800
    for each Negro, and forfeiture.


58. ~The Third Question: How shall the Interstate Coastwise Slave-Trade
be protected?~ The first proposition was to prohibit the coastwise
slave-trade altogether,[49] but an amendment reported to the House
allowed it "in any vessel or species of craft whatever." It is probable
that the first proposition would have prevailed, had it not been for the
vehement opposition of Randolph and Early.[50] They probably foresaw the
value which Virginia would derive from this trade in the future, and
consequently Randolph violently declared that if the amendment did not
prevail, "the Southern people would set the law at defiance. He would
begin the example." He maintained that by the first proposition "the
proprietor of sacred and chartered rights is prevented the
Constitutional use of his property."[51] The Conference Committee
finally arranged a compromise, forbidding the coastwise trade for
purposes of sale in vessels under forty tons.[52] This did not suit
Early, who declared that the law with this provision "would not prevent
the introduction of a single slave."[53] Randolph, too, would "rather
lose the bill, he had rather lose all the bills of the session, he had
rather lose every bill passed since the establishment of the Government,
than agree to the provision contained in this slave bill."[54] He
predicted the severance of the slave and the free States, if disunion
should ever come. Congress was, however, weary with the dragging of the
bill, and it passed both Houses with the compromise provision. Randolph
was so dissatisfied that he had a committee appointed the next day, and
introduced an amendatory bill. Both this bill and another similar one,
introduced at the next session, failed of consideration.[55]


59. ~Legislative History of the Bill.~[56] On December 12, 1805, Senator
Stephen R. Bradley of Vermont gave notice of a bill to prohibit the
introduction of slaves after 1808. By a vote of 18 to 9 leave was
given, and the bill read a first time on the 17th. On the 18th, however,
it was postponed until "the first Monday in December, 1806." The
presidential message mentioning the matter, Senator Bradley, December 3,
1806, gave notice of a similar bill, which was brought in on the 8th,
and on the 9th referred to a committee consisting of Bradley, Stone,
Giles, Gaillard, and Baldwin. This bill passed, after some
consideration, January 27. It provided, among other things, that
violations of the act should be felony, punishable with death, and
forbade the interstate coast-trade.[57]

Meantime, in the House, Mr. Bidwell of Massachusetts had proposed,
February 4, 1806, as an amendment to a bill taxing slaves imported, that
importation after December 31, 1807, be prohibited, on pain of fine and
imprisonment and forfeiture of ship.[58] This was rejected by a vote of
86 to 17. On December 3, 1806, the House, in appointing committees on
the message, "_Ordered_, That Mr. Early, Mr. Thomas M. Randolph, Mr.
John Campbell, Mr. Kenan, Mr. Cook, Mr. Kelly, and Mr. Van Rensselaer be
appointed a committee" on the slave-trade. This committee reported a
bill on the 15th, which was considered, but finally, December 18,
recommitted. It was reported in an amended form on the 19th, and amended
in Committee of the Whole so as to make violation a misdemeanor
punishable by fine and imprisonment, instead of a felony punishable by
death.[59] A struggle over the disposal of the cargo then ensued. A
motion by Bidwell to except the cargo from forfeiture was lost, 77 to
39. Another motion by Bidwell may be considered the crucial vote on the
whole bill: it was an amendment to the forfeiture clause, and read,
_"Provided, that no person shall be sold as a slave by virtue of this
act."_[60] This resulted in a tie vote, 60 to 60; but the casting vote
of the Speaker, Macon of North Carolina, defeated it. New England voted
solidly in favor of it, the Middle States stood 4 for and 2 against it,
and the six Southern States stood solid against it. On January 8 the
bill went again to a select committee of seventeen, by a vote of 76 to
46. The bill was reported back amended January 20, and on the 28th the
Senate bill was also presented to the House. On the 9th, 10th, and 11th
of February both bills were considered in Committee of the Whole, and
the Senate bill finally replaced the House bill, after several
amendments had been made.[61] The bill was then passed, by a vote of 113
to 5.[62] The Senate agreed to the amendments, including that
substituting fine and imprisonment for the death penalty, but asked for
a conference on the provision which left the interstate coast-trade
free. The six conferees succeeded in bringing the Houses to agree, by
limiting the trade to vessels over forty tons and requiring registry of
the slaves.[63]

The following diagram shows in graphic form the legislative history of
the act:--[64]

                     _Senate._      _1805._       _House._
Bradley gives notice.    +        Dec. 12.
Leave given; bill read.  +             17.
Postponed one year.      +             18.
                         |          _1806._
                                  Feb.  4.         + Bidwell's amendment.
Notice.                  +        Dec.  3.         + Committee on
Bill introduced.         +              8.         |  slave trade.
Committed.               +              9.         |
                         |             15.         + Bill reported.
                         |             17.         |
                         |             18.         |
                         |             19.         |
                         |             23.         |
                         |             29.         |
                         |             31.         |
                         |          _1807._        |
                         |        Jan.  5.         |
                         |              7.         |
                         |              8.         + Read third time;
Reported.                +             15.         |  recommitted.
                         |             16.         |
                         |             20.         + Reported
Third reading.           +             26.         |  amended.
PASSED.                  +             27.         |
                         \ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _   |
                                       28.      |  | Senate bill
                                  Feb.  9.      |  |  reported.
                                       10.      |  |
                                       11.      +  | Senate bill
                                       12.      |     amended.
Reported from House.                   13.      +       PASSED.
                          _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ |
Reported to House.       |             17.           Reported back.
                          - - - - - - - - - - -
                                       18.      |    House insists;
                          - - - - - - - - - - -       asks conference.
                         \                     /
                          - - _ __ - - - - - -
                               X
House asks conference.   _ _ _/ \_ __
                                     \ _
                                      2|5 - - - -_    Conference report
                          _ _ _ _ _  _-|- - - - -      adopted.
Conference report        /            2|6
 adopted.                \_ _ _        |
Bill enrolled.                 - - - -2|8
                                March  |2.
                                       V
                      Signed by the President.

This bill received the approval of President Jefferson, March 2, 1807,
and became thus the "Act to prohibit the importation of Slaves into any
port or place within the jurisdiction of the United States, from and
after the first day of January, in the year of our Lord one thousand
eight hundred and eight."[65] The debates in the Senate were not
reported. Those in the House were prolonged and bitter, and hinged
especially on the disposal of the slaves, the punishment of offenders,
and the coast-trade. Men were continually changing their votes, and the
bill see-sawed backward and forward, in committee and out, until the
House was thoroughly worn out. On the whole, the strong anti-slavery
men, like Bidwell and Sloan, were outgeneraled by Southerners, like
Early and Williams; and, considering the immense moral backing of the
anti-slavery party from the Revolutionary fathers down, the bill of 1807
can hardly be regarded as a great anti-slavery victory.


60. ~Enforcement of the Act.~ The period so confidently looked forward
to by the constitutional fathers had at last arrived; the slave-trade
was prohibited, and much oratory and poetry were expended in celebration
of the event. In the face of this, let us see how the Act of 1807 was
enforced and what it really accomplished. It is noticeable, in the first
place, that there was no especial set of machinery provided for the
enforcement of this act. The work fell first to the Secretary of the
Treasury, as head of the customs collection. Then, through the activity
of cruisers, the Secretary of the Navy gradually came to have oversight,
and eventually the whole matter was lodged with him, although the
Departments of State and War were more or less active on different
occasions. Later, at the advent of the Lincoln government, the
Department of the Interior was charged with the enforcement of the
slave-trade laws. It would indeed be surprising if, amid so much
uncertainty and shifting of responsibility, the law were not poorly
enforced. Poor enforcement, moreover, in the years 1808 to 1820 meant
far more than at almost any other period; for these years were, all
over the European world, a time of stirring economic change, and the set
which forces might then take would in a later period be unchangeable
without a cataclysm. Perhaps from 1808 to 1814, in the midst of
agitation and war, there was some excuse for carelessness. From 1814 on,
however, no such palliation existed, and the law was probably enforced
as the people who made it wished it enforced.

Most of the Southern States rather tardily passed the necessary
supplementary acts disposing of illegally imported Africans. A few
appear not to have passed any. Some of these laws, like the
Alabama-Mississippi Territory Act of 1815,[66] directed such Negroes to
be "sold by the proper officer of the court, to the highest bidder, at
public auction, for ready money." One-half the proceeds went to the
informer or to the collector of customs, the other half to the public
treasury. Other acts, like that of North Carolina in 1816,[67] directed
the Negroes to "be sold and disposed of for the use of the state."
One-fifth of the proceeds went to the informer. The Georgia Act of
1817[68] directed that the slaves be either sold or given to the
Colonization Society for transportation, providing the society reimburse
the State for all expense incurred, and pay for the transportation. In
this manner, machinery of somewhat clumsy build and varying pattern was
provided for the carrying out of the national act.


61. ~Evidence of the Continuance of the Trade.~ Undoubtedly, the Act of
1807 came very near being a dead letter. The testimony supporting this
view is voluminous. It consists of presidential messages, reports of
cabinet officers, letters of collectors of revenue, letters of district
attorneys, reports of committees of Congress, reports of naval
commanders, statements made on the floor of Congress, the testimony of
eye-witnesses, and the complaints of home and foreign anti-slavery
societies.

"When I was young," writes Mr. Fowler of Connecticut, "the slave-trade
was still carried on, by Connecticut shipmasters and Merchant
adventurers, for the supply of southern ports. This trade was carried
on by the consent of the Southern States, under the provisions of the
Federal Constitution, until 1808, and, after that time, clandestinely.
There was a good deal of conversation on the subject, in private
circles." Other States were said to be even more involved than
Connecticut.[69] The African Society of London estimated that, down to
1816, fifteen of the sixty thousand slaves annually taken from Africa
were shipped by Americans. "Notwithstanding the prohibitory act of
America, which was passed in 1807, ships bearing the American flag
continued to trade for slaves until 1809, when, in consequence of a
decision in the English prize appeal courts, which rendered American
slave ships liable to capture and condemnation, that flag suddenly
disappeared from the coast. Its place was almost instantaneously
supplied by the Spanish flag, which, with one or two exceptions, was now
seen for the first time on the African coast, engaged in covering the
slave trade. This sudden substitution of the Spanish for the American
flag seemed to confirm what was established in a variety of instances by
more direct testimony, that the slave trade, which now, for the first
time, assumed a Spanish dress, was in reality only the trade of other
nations in disguise."[70]

So notorious did the participation of Americans in the traffic become,
that President Madison informed Congress in his message, December 5,
1810, that "it appears that American citizens are instrumental in
carrying on a traffic in enslaved Africans, equally in violation of the
laws of humanity, and in defiance of those of their own country. The
same just and benevolent motives which produced the interdiction in
force against this criminal conduct, will doubtless be felt by Congress,
in devising further means of suppressing the evil."[71] The Secretary of
the Navy wrote the same year to Charleston, South Carolina: "I hear, not
without great concern, that the law prohibiting the importation of
slaves has been violated in frequent instances, near St. Mary's."[72]
Testimony as to violations of the law and suggestions for improving it
also came in from district attorneys.[73]

The method of introducing Negroes was simple. A slave smuggler says:
"After resting a few days at St. Augustine, ... I agreed to accompany
Diego on a land trip through the United States, where a _kaffle_ of
negroes was to precede us, for whose disposal the shrewd Portuguese had
already made arrangements with my uncle's consignees. I soon learned how
readily, and at what profits, the Florida negroes were sold into the
neighboring American States. The _kaffle_, under charge of negro
drivers, was to strike up the Escambia River, and thence cross the
boundary into Georgia, where some of our wild Africans were mixed with
various squads of native blacks, and driven inland, till sold off,
singly or by couples, on the road. At this period [1812], the United
States had declared the African slave trade illegal, and passed
stringent laws to prevent the importation of negroes; yet the Spanish
possessions were thriving on this inland exchange of negroes and
mulattoes; Florida was a sort of nursery for slave-breeders, and many
American citizens grew rich by trafficking in Guinea negroes, and
smuggling them continually, in small parties, through the southern
United States. At the time I mention, the business was a lively one,
owing to the war then going on between the States and England, and the
unsettled condition of affairs on the border."[74]

The Spanish flag continued to cover American slave-traders. The rapid
rise of privateering during the war was not caused solely by patriotic
motives; for many armed ships fitted out in the United States obtained a
thin Spanish disguise at Havana, and transported thousands of slaves to
Brazil and the West Indies. Sometimes all disguise was thrown aside, and
the American flag appeared on the slave coast, as in the cases of the
"Paz,"[75] the "Rebecca," the "Rosa"[76] (formerly the privateer
"Commodore Perry"), the "Dorset" of Baltimore,[77] and the "Saucy
Jack."[78] Governor McCarthy of Sierra Leone wrote, in 1817: "The slave
trade is carried on most vigorously by the Spaniards, Portuguese,
Americans and French. I have had it affirmed from several quarters, and
do believe it to be a fact, that there is a greater number of vessels
employed in that traffic than at any former period."[79]


62. ~Apathy of the Federal Government.~ The United States cruisers
succeeded now and then in capturing a slaver, like the "Eugene," which
was taken when within four miles of the New Orleans bar.[80] President
Madison again, in 1816, urged Congress to act on account of the
"violations and evasions which, it is suggested, are chargeable on
unworthy citizens, who mingle in the slave trade under foreign flags,
and with foreign ports; and by collusive importations of slaves into the
United States, through adjoining ports and territories."[81] The
executive was continually in receipt of ample evidence of this illicit
trade and of the helplessness of officers of the law. In 1817 it was
reported to the Secretary of the Navy that most of the goods carried to
Galveston were brought into the United States; "the more valuable, and
the slaves are smuggled in through the numerous inlets to the westward,
where the people are but too much disposed to render them every possible
assistance. Several hundred slaves are now at Galveston, and persons
have gone from New-Orleans to purchase them. Every exertion will be
made to intercept them, but I have little hopes of success."[82] Similar
letters from naval officers and collectors showed that a system of slave
piracy had arisen since the war, and that at Galveston there was an
establishment of organized brigands, who did not go to the trouble of
sailing to Africa for their slaves, but simply captured slavers and sold
their cargoes into the United States. This Galveston nest had, in 1817,
eleven armed vessels to prosecute the work, and "the most shameful
violations of the slave act, as well as our revenue laws, continue to be
practised."[83] Cargoes of as many as three hundred slaves were arriving
in Texas. All this took place under Aury, the buccaneer governor; and
when he removed to Amelia Island in 1817 with the McGregor raid, the
illicit traffic in slaves, which had been going on there for years,[84]
took an impulse that brought it even to the somewhat deaf ears of
Collector Bullock. He reported, May 22, 1817: "I have just received
information from a source on which I can implicitly rely, that it has
already become the practice to introduce into the state of Georgia,
across the St. Mary's River, from Amelia Island, East Florida, Africans,
who have been carried into the Port of Fernandina, subsequent to the
capture of it by the Patriot army now in possession of it ...; were the
legislature to pass an act giving compensation in some manner to
informers, it would have a tendency in a great degree to prevent the
practice; as the thing now is, no citizen will take the trouble of
searching for and detecting the slaves. I further understand, that the
evil will not be confined altogether to Africans, but will be extended
to the worst class of West India slaves."[85]

Undoubtedly, the injury done by these pirates to the regular
slave-trading interests was largely instrumental in exterminating them.
Late in 1817 United States troops seized Amelia Island, and President
Monroe felicitated Congress and the country upon escaping the "annoyance
and injury" of this illicit trade.[86] The trade, however, seems to have
continued, as is shown by such letters as the following, written three
and a half months later:--

    PORT OF DARIEN, March 14, 1818.

    ... It is a painful duty, sir, to express to you, that I am in
    possession of undoubted information, that African and West India
    negroes are almost daily illicitly introduced into Georgia, for
    sale or settlement, or passing through it to the territories of
    the United States for similar purposes; these facts are
    notorious; and it is not unusual to see such negroes in the
    streets of St. Mary's, and such too, recently captured by our
    vessels of war, and ordered to Savannah, were illegally bartered
    by hundreds in that city, _for_ this bartering or bonding (as
    _it is called_, but in reality _selling_,) actually took place
    before any decision had [been] passed by the court respecting
    them. I cannot but again express to you, sir, that these
    irregularities and mocking of the laws, by men who understand
    them, and who, it was presumed, would have respected them, are
    such, that it requires the immediate interposition of Congress
    to effect a suppression of this traffic; for, as things are,
    should a faithful officer of the government apprehend such
    negroes, to avoid the penalties imposed by the laws, the
    proprietors disclaim them, and some agent of the executive
    demands a delivery of the same to him, who may employ them as he
    pleases, or effect a sale by way of a bond, for the restoration
    of the negroes when legally called on so to do; which bond, it
    is _understood_, is to be _forfeited_, as the amount of the bond
    is so much less than the value of the property.... There are
    many negroes ... recently introduced into this state and the
    Alabama territory, and which can be apprehended. The undertaking
    would be great; but to be sensible that we shall possess your
    approbation, and that we are carrying the views and wishes of
    the government into execution, is all we wish, and it shall be
    done, independent of every personal consideration.

    I have, etc.[87]

This "approbation" failed to come to the zealous collector, and on the
5th of July he wrote that, "not being favored with a reply," he has been
obliged to deliver over to the governor's agents ninety-one illegally
imported Negroes.[88] Reports from other districts corroborate this
testimony. The collector at Mobile writes of strange proceedings on the
part of the courts.[89] General D.B. Mitchell, ex-governor of Georgia
and United States Indian agent, after an investigation in 1821 by
Attorney-General Wirt, was found "guilty of having prostituted his
power, as agent for Indian affairs at the Creek agency, to the purpose
of aiding and assisting in a conscious breach of the act of Congress of
1807, in prohibition of the slave trade--and this from mercenary
motives."[90] The indefatigable Collector Chew of New Orleans wrote to
Washington that, "to put a stop to that traffic, a naval force suitable
to those waters is indispensable," and that "vast numbers of slaves will
be introduced to an alarming extent, unless prompt and effectual
measures are adopted by the general government."[91] Other collectors
continually reported infractions, complaining that they could get no
assistance from the citizens,[92] or plaintively asking the services of
"one small cutter."[93]

Meantime, what was the response of the government to such
representations, and what efforts were made to enforce the act? A few
unsystematic and spasmodic attempts are recorded. In 1811 some special
instructions were sent out,[94] and the President was authorized to
seize Amelia Island.[95] Then came the war; and as late as November 15,
1818, in spite of the complaints of collectors, we find no revenue
cutter on the Gulf coast.[96] During the years 1817 and 1818[97] some
cruisers went there irregularly, but they were too large to be
effective; and the partial suppression of the Amelia Island pirates was
all that was accomplished. On the whole, the efforts of the government
lacked plan, energy, and often sincerity. Some captures of slavers were
made;[98] but, as the collector at Mobile wrote, anent certain cases,
"this was owing rather to accident, than any well-timed arrangement." He
adds: "from the Chandalier Islands to the Perdido river, including the
coast, and numerous other islands, we have only a small boat, with four
men and an inspector, to oppose to the whole confederacy of smugglers
and pirates."[99]

To cap the climax, the government officials were so negligent that
Secretary Crawford, in 1820, confessed to Congress that "it appears,
from an examination of the records of this office, that no particular
instructions have ever been given, by the Secretary of the Treasury,
under the original or supplementary acts prohibiting the introduction of
slaves into the United States."[100] Beside this inactivity, the
government was criminally negligent in not prosecuting and punishing
offenders when captured. Urgent appeals for instruction from prosecuting
attorneys were too often received in official silence; complaints as to
the violation of law by State officers went unheeded;[101] informers
were unprotected and sometimes driven from home.[102] Indeed, the most
severe comment on the whole period is the report, January 7, 1819, of
the Register of the Treasury, who, after the wholesale and open
violation of the Act of 1807, reported, in response to a request from
the House, "that it doth not appear, from an examination of the records
of this office, and particularly of the accounts (to the date of their
last settlement) of the collectors of the customs, and of the several
marshals of the United States, that any forfeitures had been incurred
under the said act."[103]

63. ~Typical Cases.~ At this date (January 7, 1819), however, certain
cases were stated to be pending, a history of which will fitly conclude
this discussion. In 1818 three American schooners sailed from the United
States to Havana; on June 2 they started back with cargoes aggregating
one hundred and seven slaves. The schooner "Constitution" was captured
by one of Andrew Jackson's officers under the guns of Fort Barancas. The
"Louisa" and "Marino" were captured by Lieutenant McKeever of the United
States Navy. The three vessels were duly proceeded against at Mobile,
and the case began slowly to drag along. The slaves, instead of being
put under the care of the zealous marshal of the district, were placed
in the hands of three bondsmen, friends of the judge. The marshal
notified the government of this irregularity, but apparently received no
answer. In 1822 the three vessels were condemned as forfeited, but the
court "reserved" for future order the distribution of the slaves.
Nothing whatever either then or later was done to the slave-traders
themselves. The owners of the ships promptly appealed to the Supreme
Court of the United States, and that tribunal, in 1824, condemned the
three vessels and the slaves on two of them.[104] These slaves,
considerably reduced in number "from various causes," were sold at
auction for the benefit of the State, in spite of the Act of 1819.
Meantime, before the decision of the Supreme Court, the judge of the
Supreme Court of West Florida had awarded to certain alleged Spanish
claimants of the slaves indemnity for nearly the whole number seized, at
the price of $650 per head, and the Secretary of the Treasury had
actually paid the claim.[105] In 1826 Lieutenant McKeever urgently
petitions Congress for his prize-money of $4,415.15, which he has not
yet received.[106] The "Constitution" was for some inexplicable reason
released from bond, and the whole case fades in a very thick cloud of
official mist. In 1831 Congress sought to inquire into the final
disposition of the slaves. The information given was never printed; but
as late as 1836 a certain Calvin Mickle petitions Congress for
reimbursement for the slaves sold, for their hire, for their natural
increase, for expenses incurred, and for damages.[107]


64. ~The Supplementary Acts, 1818-1820.~ To remedy the obvious defects
of the Act of 1807 two courses were possible: one, to minimize the crime
of transportation, and, by encouraging informers, to concentrate efforts
against the buying of smuggled slaves; the other, to make the crime of
transportation so great that no slaves would be imported. The Act of
1818 tried the first method; that of 1819, the second.[108] The latter
was obviously the more upright and logical, and the only method
deserving thought even in 1807; but the Act of 1818 was the natural
descendant of that series of compromises which began in the
Constitutional Convention, and which, instead of postponing the
settlement of critical questions to more favorable times, rather
aggravated and complicated them.

The immediate cause of the Act of 1818 was the Amelia Island
scandal.[109] Committees in both Houses reported bills, but that of the
Senate finally passed. There does not appear to have been very much
debate.[110] The sale of Africans for the benefit of the informer and of
the United States was strongly urged "as the only means of executing the
laws against the slave trade as experience had fully demonstrated since
the origin of the prohibition."[111] This proposition was naturally
opposed as "inconsistent with the principles of our Government, and
calculated to throw as wide open the door to the importation of slaves
as it was before the existing prohibition."[112] The act, which became a
law April 20, 1818,[113] was a poorly constructed compromise, which
virtually acknowledged the failure of efforts to control the trade, and
sought to remedy defects by pitting cupidity against cupidity, informer
against thief. One-half of all forfeitures and fines were to go to the
informer, and penalties for violation were changed as follows:--

    For equipping a slaver, instead of a fine of $20,000, a fine of
    $1000 to $5000 and imprisonment from 3 to 7 years.

    For transporting Negroes, instead of a fine of $5000 and
    forfeiture of ship and Negroes, a fine of $1000 to $5000 and
    imprisonment from 3 to 7 years.

    For actual importation, instead of a fine of $1000 to $10,000
    and imprisonment from 5 to 10 years, a fine of $1000 to
    $10,000, and imprisonment from 3 to 7 years.

    For knowingly buying illegally imported Negroes, instead of a
    fine of $800 for each Negro and forfeiture, a fine of $1000 for
    each Negro.

The burden of proof was laid on the defendant, to the extent that he
must prove that the slave in question had been imported at least five
years before the prosecution. The slaves were still left to the disposal
of the States.

This statute was, of course, a failure from the start,[114] and at the
very next session Congress took steps to revise it. A bill was reported
in the House, January 13, 1819, but it was not discussed till
March.[115] It finally passed, after "much debate."[116] The Senate
dropped its own bill, and, after striking out the provision for the
death penalty, passed the bill as it came from the House.[117] The House
acquiesced, and the bill became a law, March 3, 1819,[118] in the midst
of the Missouri trouble. This act directed the President to use armed
cruisers on the coasts of the United States and Africa to suppress the
slave-trade; one-half the proceeds of the condemned ship were to go to
the captors as bounty, provided the Africans were safely lodged with a
United States marshal and the crew with the civil authorities. These
provisions were seriously marred by a proviso which Butler of Louisiana,
had inserted, with a "due regard for the interests of the State which he
represented," viz., that a captured slaver must always be returned to
the port whence she sailed.[119] This, of course, secured decided
advantages to Southern slave-traders. The most radical provision of the
act was that which directed the President to "make such regulations and
arrangements as he may deem expedient for the safe keeping, support, and
removal beyond the limits of the United States, of all such negroes,
mulattoes, or persons of colour, as may be so delivered and brought
within their jurisdiction;" and to appoint an agent in Africa to receive
such Negroes.[120] Finally, an appropriation of $100,000 was made to
enforce the act.[121] This act was in some measure due to the new
colonization movement; and the return of Africans recaptured was a
distinct recognition of its efforts, and the real foundation of Liberia.

To render this straightforward act effective, it was necessary to add
but one measure, and that was a penalty commensurate with the crime of
slave stealing. This was accomplished by the Act of May 15, 1820,[122] a
law which may be regarded as the last of the Missouri Compromise
measures. The act originated from the various bills on piracy which were
introduced early in the sixteenth Congress. The House bill, in spite of
opposition, was amended so as to include slave-trading under piracy,
and passed. The Senate agreed without a division. This law provided that
direct participation in the slave-trade should be piracy, punishable
with death.[123]

  ----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------
  STATUTES AT LARGE.    |        DATE.         |  AMOUNT APPROPRIATED.
  ----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------
     VOL.    PAGE       |                      |
     III.    533-4      |    March   3, 1819   |          $100,000
      "      764        |      "     3, 1823   |            50,000
     IV.     141        |      "    14, 1826   |            32,000
      "      208        |    March   2, 1827   |          / 36,710
                        |                      |          \ 20,000
      "      302        |    May    24, 1828   |            30,000
      "      354        |    March   2, 1829   |            16,000
      "      462        |      "     2, 1831   |            16,000
      "      615        |    Feb.   20, 1833   |             5,000
      "      671        |    Jan.   24, 1834   |             5,000
     V.      157-8      |    March   3, 1837   |            11,413.57
      "      501        |    Aug.    4, 1842   |            10,543.42
      "      615        |    March   3, 1843   |             5,000
     IX.      96        |    Aug.   10, 1846   |            25,000
     XI.      90        |      "    18, 1856   |             8,000
      "      227        |    March   3, 1857   |             8,000
      "      404        |      "     3, 1859   |            75,000
     XII.     21        |    May    26, 1860   |            40,000
      "      132        |    Feb.   19, 1861   |           900,000
      "      219        |    March   2, 1861   |           900,000
      "      639        |    Feb.    4, 1863   |            17,000
     XIII.   424        |    Jan.   24, 1865   |            17,000
     XIV.    226        |    July   25, 1866   |            17,000
      "      415        |    Feb.   28, 1867   |            17,000
     XV.      58        |    March  30, 1868   |            12,500
      "      321        |    March   3, 1869   |            12,500
  ----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------
   Total, 50 years                                      $2,386,666.99
   Minus surpluses re-appropriated (approximate)            48,666.99?
                                                        --------------
                                                        $2,338,000
   Cost of squadron, 1843-58, @ $384,500 per year
     (_House Exec. Doc._, 31 Cong. 1 sess. IX. No. 73)   5,767,500
   Returning slaves on "Wildfire" (_Statutes at Large_,
     XII. 41)                                              250,000
   Approximate cost of squadron, 1858-66, probably not
     less than $500,000 per year                         4,000,000?
                                                       ---------------
   Approximate money cost of suppressing the
     slave-trade                                       $12,355,500?

Cf. Kendall's Report: _Senate Doc._, 21 Cong. 2 sess. I. No. 1, pp.
211-8; _Amer. State Papers, Naval_, III. No. 429 E.; also Reports of
the Secretaries of the Navy from 1819 to 1860.


65. ~Enforcement of the Supplementary Acts, 1818-1825.~ A somewhat more
sincere and determined effort to enforce the slave-trade laws now
followed; and yet it is a significant fact that not until Lincoln's
administration did a slave-trader suffer death for violating the laws of
the United States. The participation of Americans in the trade
continued, declining somewhat between 1825 and 1830, and then reviving,
until it reached its highest activity between 1840 and 1860. The
development of a vast internal slave-trade, and the consequent rise in
the South of vested interests strongly opposed to slave smuggling, led
to a falling off in the illicit introduction of Negroes after 1825,
until the fifties; nevertheless, smuggling never entirely ceased, and
large numbers were thus added to the plantations of the Gulf States.

Monroe had various constitutional scruples as to the execution of the
Act of 1819;[124] but, as Congress took no action, he at last put a fair
interpretation on his powers, and appointed Samuel Bacon as an agent in
Africa to form a settlement for recaptured Africans. Gradually the
agency thus formed became merged with that of the Colonization Society
on Cape Mesurado; and from this union Liberia was finally evolved.[125]

Meantime, during the years 1818 to 1820, the activity of the
slave-traders was prodigious. General James Tallmadge declared in the
House, February 15, 1819: "Our laws are already highly penal against
their introduction, and yet, it is a well known fact, that about
fourteen thousand slaves have been brought into our country this last
year."[126] In the same year Middleton of South Carolina and Wright of
Virginia estimated illicit introduction at 13,000 and 15,000
respectively.[127] Judge Story, in charging a jury, took occasion to
say: "We have but too many proofs from unquestionable sources, that it
[the slave-trade] is still carried on with all the implacable rapacity
of former times. Avarice has grown more subtle in its evasions, and
watches and seizes its prey with an appetite quickened rather than
suppressed by its guilty vigils. American citizens are steeped to their
very mouths (I can hardly use too bold a figure) in this stream of
iniquity."[128] The following year, 1820, brought some significant
statements from various members of Congress. Said Smith of South
Carolina: "Pharaoh was, for his temerity, drowned in the Red Sea, in
pursuing them [the Israelites] contrary to God's express will; but our
Northern friends have not been afraid even of that, in their zeal to
furnish the Southern States with Africans. They are better seamen than
Pharaoh, and calculate by that means to elude the vigilance of Heaven;
which they seem to disregard, if they can but elude the violated laws of
their country."[129] As late as May he saw little hope of suppressing
the traffic.[130] Sergeant of Pennsylvania declared: "It is notorious
that, in spite of the utmost vigilance that can be employed, African
negroes are clandestinely brought in and sold as slaves."[131] Plumer of
New Hampshire stated that "of the unhappy beings, thus in violation of
all laws transported to our shores, and thrown by force into the mass of
our black population, scarcely one in a hundred is ever detected by the
officers of the General Government, in a part of the country, where, if
we are to believe the statement of Governor Rabun, 'an officer who would
perform his duty, by attempting to enforce the law [against the slave
trade] is, by many, considered as an officious meddler, and treated with
derision and contempt;' ... I have been told by a gentleman, who has
attended particularly to this subject, that ten thousand slaves were in
one year smuggled into the United States; and that, even for the last
year, we must count the number not by hundreds, but by thousands."[132]
In 1821 a committee of Congress characterized prevailing methods as
those "of the grossest fraud that could be practised to deceive the
officers of government."[133] Another committee, in 1822, after a
careful examination of the subject, declare that they "find it
impossible to measure with precision the effect produced upon the
American branch of the slave trade by the laws above mentioned, and the
seizures under them. They are unable to state, whether those American
merchants, the American capital and seamen which heretofore aided in
this traffic, have abandoned it altogether, or have sought shelter under
the flags of other nations." They then state the suspicious circumstance
that, with the disappearance of the American flag from the traffic, "the
trade, notwithstanding, increases annually, under the flags of other
nations." They complain of the spasmodic efforts of the executive. They
say that the first United States cruiser arrived on the African coast in
March, 1820, and remained a "few weeks;" that since then four others had
in two years made five visits in all; but "since the middle of last
November, the commencement of the healthy season on that coast, no
vessel has been, nor, as your committee is informed, is, under orders
for that service."[134] The United States African agent, Ayres, reported
in 1823: "I was informed by an American officer who had been on the
coast in 1820, that he had boarded 20 American vessels in one morning,
lying in the port of Gallinas, and fitted for the reception of slaves.
It is a lamentable fact, that most of the harbours, between the Senegal
and the line, were visited by an equal number of American vessels, and
for the sole purpose of carrying away slaves. Although for some years
the coast had been occasionally visited by our cruizers, their short
stay and seldom appearance had made but slight impression on those
traders, rendered hardy by repetition of crime, and avaricious by
excessive gain. They were enabled by a regular system to gain
intelligence of any cruizer being on the coast."[135]

Even such spasmodic efforts bore abundant fruit, and indicated what
vigorous measures might have accomplished. Between May, 1818, and
November, 1821, nearly six hundred Africans were recaptured and eleven
American slavers taken.[136] Such measures gradually changed the
character of the trade, and opened the international phase of the
question. American slavers cleared for foreign ports, there took a
foreign flag and papers, and then sailed boldly past American cruisers,
although their real character was often well known. More stringent
clearance laws and consular instructions might have greatly reduced this
practice; but nothing was ever done, and gradually the laws became in
large measure powerless to deal with the bulk of the illicit trade. In
1820, September 16, a British officer, in his official report, declares
that, in spite of United States laws, "American vessels, American
subjects, and American capital, are unquestionably engaged in the trade,
though under other colours and in disguise."[137] The United States ship
"Cyane" at one time reported ten captures within a few days, adding:
"Although they are evidently owned by Americans, they are so completely
covered by Spanish papers that it is impossible to condemn them."[138]
The governor of Sierra Leone reported the rivers Nunez and Pongas full
of renegade European and American slave-traders;[139] the trade was said
to be carried on "to an extent that almost staggers belief."[140] Down
to 1824 or 1825, reports from all quarters prove this activity in
slave-trading.

The execution of the laws within the country exhibits grave defects and
even criminal negligence. Attorney-General Wirt finds it necessary to
assure collectors, in 1819, that "it is against public policy to
dispense with prosecutions for violation of the law to prohibit the
Slave trade."[141] One district attorney writes: "It appears to be
almost impossible to enforce the laws of the United States against
offenders after the negroes have been landed in the state."[142] Again,
it is asserted that "when vessels engaged in the slave trade have been
detained by the American cruizers, and sent into the slave-holding
states, there appears at once a difficulty in securing the freedom to
these captives which the laws of the United States have decreed for
them."[143] In some cases, one man would smuggle in the Africans and
hide them in the woods; then his partner would "rob" him, and so all
trace be lost.[144] Perhaps 350 Africans were officially reported as
brought in contrary to law from 1818 to 1820: the absurdity of this
figure is apparent.[145] A circular letter to the marshals, in 1821,
brought reports of only a few well-known cases, like that of the
"General Ramirez;" the marshal of Louisiana had "no information."[146]

There appears to be little positive evidence of a large illicit
importation into the country for a decade after 1825. It is hardly
possible, however, considering the activity in the trade, that slaves
were not largely imported. Indeed, when we note how the laws were
continually broken in other respects, absence of evidence of petty
smuggling becomes presumptive evidence that collusive or tacit
understanding of officers and citizens allowed the trade to some
extent.[147] Finally, it must be noted that during all this time
scarcely a man suffered for participating in the trade, beyond the loss
of the Africans and, more rarely, of his ship. Red-handed slavers,
caught in the act and convicted, were too often, like La Coste of South
Carolina, the subjects of executive clemency.[148] In certain cases
there were those who even had the effrontery to ask Congress to cancel
their own laws. For instance, in 1819 a Venezuelan privateer, secretly
fitted out and manned by Americans in Baltimore, succeeded in capturing
several American, Portuguese, and Spanish slavers, and appropriating the
slaves; being finally wrecked herself, she transferred her crew and
slaves to one of her prizes, the "Antelope," which was eventually
captured by a United States cruiser and the 280 Africans sent to
Georgia. After much litigation, the United States Supreme Court ordered
those captured from Spaniards to be surrendered, and the others to be
returned to Africa. By some mysterious process, only 139 Africans now
remained, 100 of whom were sent to Africa. The Spanish claimants of the
remaining thirty-nine sold them to a certain Mr. Wilde, who gave bond to
transport them out of the country. Finally, in December, 1827, there
came an innocent petition to Congress to _cancel this bond_.[149] A bill
to that effect passed and was approved, May 2, 1828,[150] and in
consequence these Africans remained as slaves in Georgia.

On the whole, it is plain that, although in the period from 1807 to 1820
Congress laid down broad lines of legislation sufficient, save in some
details, to suppress the African slave trade to America, yet the
execution of these laws was criminally lax. Moreover, by the facility
with which slavers could disguise their identity, it was possible for
them to escape even a vigorous enforcement of our laws. This situation
could properly be met only by energetic and sincere international
co-operation. The next chapter will review efforts directed toward this
end.[151]


FOOTNOTES:

  [1] _House Journal_ (repr. 1826), 9 Cong. 2 sess. V. 468.

  [2] Cf. below, Â§ 59.

  [3] _Annals of Cong._, 9 Cong. 2 sess. p. 238.

  [4] There were at least twelve distinct propositions as to the
      disposal of the Africans imported:--

      1. That they be forfeited and sold by the United States at
      auction (Early's bill, reported Dec. 15: _Annals of Cong._, 9
      Cong. 2 sess. pp. 167-8).

      2. That they be forfeited and left to the disposal of the
      States (proposed by Bidwell and Early: _Ibid._, pp. 181, 221,
      477. This was the final settlement.)

      3. That they be forfeited and sold, and that the proceeds go
      to charities, education, or internal improvements (Early,
      Holland, and Masters: _Ibid._, p. 273).

      4. That they be forfeited and indentured for life (Alston and
      Bidwell: _Ibid._, pp. 170-1).

      5. That they be forfeited and indentured for 7, 8, or 10
      years (Pitkin: _Ibid._, p. 186).

      6. That they be forfeited and given into the custody of the
      President, and by him indentured in free States for a term of
      years (bill reported from the Senate Jan. 28: _House Journal_
      (repr. 1826), 9 Cong. 2 sess. V. 575; _Annals of Cong._, 9
      Cong. 2 sess. p. 477. Cf. also _Ibid._, p. 272).

      7. That the Secretary of the Treasury dispose of them, at his
      discretion, in service (Quincy: _Ibid._, p. 183).

      8. That those imported into slave States be returned to
      Africa or bound out in free States (Sloan: _Ibid._, p. 254).

      9. That all be sent back to Africa (Smilie: _Ibid._, p. 176).

      10. That those imported into free States be free, those
      imported into slave States be returned to Africa or indentured
      (Sloan: _Ibid._, p. 226).

      11. That they be forfeited but not sold (Sloan and others:
      _Ibid._, p. 270).

      12. That they be free (Sloan: _Ibid._, p. 168; Bidwell:
      _House Journal_ (repr. 1826), 9 Cong. 2 sess. V. 515).

  [5] Bidwell, Cook, and others: _Annals of Cong._, 9 Cong. 2
      sess. p. 201.

  [6] Bidwell: _Ibid._, p. 172.

  [7] Fisk: _Ibid._, pp. 224-5; Bidwell: _Ibid._, p. 221.

  [8] Quincy: _Ibid._, p. 184.

  [9] _Annals of Cong._, 9 Cong. 2 sess. p. 478; Bidwell:
      _Ibid._, p. 171.

 [10] _Ibid._, p. 172.

 [11] _Annals of Cong._, 9 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 173-4.

 [12] Alston: _Ibid._, p. 170.

 [13] D.R. Williams: _Annals of Cong._, 9 Cong. 2 sess. p. 183.

 [14] Early: _Ibid._, pp. 184-5.

 [15] Lloyd, Early, and others: _Ibid._, p. 203.

 [16] Alston: _Ibid._, p. 170.

 [17] Quincy: _Ibid._, p. 222; Macon: _Ibid._, p. 225.

 [18] Macon: _Ibid._, p. 177.

 [19] Barker: _Ibid._, p. 171; Bidwell: _Ibid._, p. 172.

 [20] Clay, Alston, and Early: _Ibid._, p. 266.

 [21] Clay, Alston, and Early: _Annals of Cong._, 9 Cong. 2
      sess. p. 266.

 [22] Bidwell: _Ibid._, p. 221.

 [23] Sloan and others: _Ibid._, p. 271; Early and Alston:
      _Ibid._, pp. 168, 171.

 [24] Ely, Bidwell, and others: _Ibid._, pp. 179, 181, 271;
      Smilie and Findley: _Ibid._, pp. 225, 226.

 [25] _Ibid._, p. 240. Cf. Lloyd: _Ibid._, p. 236.

 [26] Holland: _Ibid._, p. 241.

 [27] _Ibid._, p. 227; Macon: _Ibid._, p. 225.

 [28] Bidwell, Cook, and others: _Ibid._, p. 201.

 [29] Bidwell: _Annals of Cong._, 9 Cong. 2 sess. p. 221. Cf.
      _Ibid._, p. 202.

 [30] Early: _Ibid._, p. 239.

 [31] _Ibid._

 [32] _Ibid._, p. 1267.

 [33] There were about six distinct punishments suggested:--

      1. Forfeiture, and fine of $5000 to $10,000 (Early's bill:
      _Ibid._, p. 167).

      2. Forfeiture and imprisonment (amendment to Senate bill:
      _Ibid._, pp. 231, 477, 483).

      3. Forfeiture, imprisonment from 5 to 10 years, and fine of
      $1000 to $10,000 (amendment to amendment of Senate bill:
      _Ibid._, pp. 228, 483).

      4. Forfeiture, imprisonment from 5 to 40 years, and fine of
      $1000 to $10,000 (Chandler's amendment: _Ibid._, p. 228).

      5. Forfeiture of all property, and imprisonment (Pitkin:
      _Ibid._, p. 188).

      6. Death (Smilie: _Ibid._, pp. 189-90; bill reported to House,
      Dec. 19: _Ibid._, p. 190; Senate bill as reported to House,
      Jan. 28).

 [34] Smilie: _Annals of Cong._, 9 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 189-90.

 [35] Tallmadge: _Ibid._, p. 233; Olin: _Ibid._, p. 237.

 [36] Ely: _Ibid._, p. 237.

 [37] Smilie: _Ibid._, p. 236. Cf. Sloan: _Ibid._, p. 232.

 [38] Hastings: _Ibid._, p. 228.

 [39] Dwight: _Ibid._, p. 241; Ely: _Ibid._, p. 232.

 [40] Mosely: _Ibid._, pp. 234-5.

 [41] Tallmadge: _Ibid._, pp. 232, 234. Cf. Dwight: _Ibid._, p. 241.

 [42] Varnum: _Ibid._, p. 243.

 [43] Elmer: _Annals of Cong._, 9 Cong. 2 sess. p. 235.

 [44] _Ibid._, p. 240.

 [45] Holland: _Ibid._, p. 240.

 [46] Early: _Ibid._, pp. 238-9; Holland: _Ibid._, p. 239.

 [47] _Ibid._, p. 233. Cf. Lloyd: _Ibid._, p. 237; Ely:
      _Ibid._, p. 232; Early: _Ibid._, pp. 238-9.

 [48] _Ibid._, p. 484.

 [49] This was the provision of the Senate bill as reported to
      the House. It was over the House amendment to this that the
      Houses disagreed. Cf. _Ibid._, p. 484.

 [50] Cf. _Annals of Cong._, 9 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 527-8.

 [51] _Ibid._, p. 528.

 [52] _Ibid._, p. 626.

 [53] _Ibid._

 [54] _Ibid._

 [55] _Ibid._, pp. 636-8; _House Journal_ (repr. 1826), 9 Cong.
      2 sess. V. 616, and House Bill No. 219; _Ibid._, 10 Cong. 1
      sess. VI. 27, 50; _Annals of Cong._, 10 Cong. 1 sess. pp.
      854-5, 961.

 [56] On account of the meagre records it is difficult to
      follow the course of this bill. I have pieced together
      information from various sources, and trust that this account
      is approximately correct.

 [57] Cf. _Senate Journal_ (repr. 1821), 9 Cong. 2 sess. IV.,
      Senate Bill No. 41.

 [58] _Annals of Cong._, 9 Cong. 1 sess. p. 438. Cf. above, Â§
      53.

 [59] This amendment of the Committee of the Whole was adopted
      by a vote of 63 to 53. The New England States stood 3 to 2 for
      the death penalty; the Middle States were evenly divided, 3
      and 3; and the South stood 5 to 0 against it, with Kentucky
      evenly divided. Cf. _House Journal_ (repr. 1826), 9 Cong. 2
      sess. V. 504.

 [60] _Ibid._, V. 514-5.

 [61] The substitution of the Senate bill was a victory for the
      anti-slavery party, as all battles had to be fought again. The
      Southern party, however, succeeded in carrying all its
      amendments.

 [62] Messrs. Betton of New Hampshire, Chittenden of Vermont,
      Garnett and Trigg of Virginia, and D.R. Williams of South
      Carolina voted against the bill: _House Journal_ (repr. 1826),
      9 Cong. 2 sess. V. 585-6.

 [63] _Annals of Cong._, 9 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 626-7.

 [64] The unassigned dates refer to debates, etc. The history
      of the amendments and debates on the measure may be traced in
      the following references:--

                      _Senate_ (Bill No. 41).

      _Annals of Cong._, 9 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 20-1; 9 Cong. 2 sess.
      pp. 16, 19, 23, 33, 36, 45, 47, 68, 69, 70, 71, 79, 87, 93,
      etc.

      _Senate Journal_ (repr. 1826), 9 Cong. 1-2 sess. IV. 11, 112,
      123, 124, 132, 133, 150, 158, 164, 165, 167, 168, etc.

                    *       *       *       *       *

                      _House_ (Bill No. 148).

      _Annals of Cong._, 9 Cong. 1 sess. p. 438; 9 Cong. 2 sess. pp.
      114, 151, 167-8, 173-4, 180, 183, 189, 200, 202-4, 220, 228,
      231, 240, 254, 264, 266-7, 270, 273, 373, 427, 477, 481,
      484-6, 527, 528, etc.

      _House Journal_ (repr. 1826), 9 Cong. 1-2 sess. V. 470, 482,
      488, 490, 491, 496, 500, 504, 510, 513-6, 517, 540, 557, 575,
      579, 581, 583-4, 585, 592, 594, 610, 613-5, 623, 638, 640,
      etc.

 [65] _Statutes at Large_, II. 426. There were some few
      attempts to obtain laws of relief from this bill: see, e.g.,
      _Annals of Cong._, 10 Cong. 1 sess. p. 1243; 11 Cong. 1 sess.
      pp. 34, 36-9, 41, 43, 48, 49, 380, 465, 688, 706, 2209; _House
      Journal_ (repr. 1826), II Cong. 1-2 sess. VII. 100, 102, 124,
      etc., and Index, Senate Bill No. 8. Cf. _Amer. State Papers,
      Miscellaneous_, II. No. 269. There was also one proposed
      amendment to make the prohibition perpetual: _Amer. State
      Papers, Miscellaneous_, I. No. 244.

 [66] Toulmin, _Digest of the Laws of Alabama_, p. 637.

 [67] _Laws of North Carolina_ (revision of 1819), II. 1350.

 [68] Prince, _Digest_, p. 793.

 [69] Fowler, _Historical Status of the Negro in Connecticut_,
      in _Local Law_, etc., pp. 122, 126.

 [70] _House Reports_, 17 Cong. 1 sess. II. No. 92, p. 32.

 [71] _House Journal_ (repr. 1826), 11 Cong. 3 sess. VII. p.
      435.

 [72] _House Doc._, 15 Cong. 2 sess. IV. No. 84, p. 5.

 [73] See, e.g., _House Journal_ (repr. 1826), 11 Cong. 3 sess.
      VII. p. 575.

 [74] Drake, _Revelations of a Slave Smuggler_, p. 51. Parts of
      this narrative are highly colored and untrustworthy; this
      passage, however, has every earmark of truth, and is confirmed
      by many incidental allusions.

 [75] For accounts of these slavers, see _House Reports_, 17
      Cong. 1 sess. II. No. 92, pp. 30-50. The "Paz" was an armed
      slaver flying the American flag.

 [76] Said to be owned by an Englishman, but fitted in America
      and manned by Americans. It was eventually captured by H.M.S.
      "Bann," after a hard fight.

 [77] Also called Spanish schooner "Triumvirate," with American
      supercargo, Spanish captain, and American, French, Spanish,
      and English crew. It was finally captured by a British vessel.

 [78] An American slaver of 1814, which was boarded by a
      British vessel. All the above cases, and many others, were
      proven before British courts.

 [79] _House Reports_, 17 Cong. 1 sess. II. No. 92, p. 51.

 [80] _House Doc._, 15 Cong. 1 sess. II. No. 12, pp. 22, 38.
      This slaver was after capture sent to New Orleans,--an
      illustration of the irony of the Act of 1807.

 [81] _House Journal_, 14 Cong. 2 sess. p. 15.

 [82] _House Doc._, 16 Cong. 1 sess. III. No. 36, p. 5.

 [83] _Ibid._, 15 Cong. 1 sess. II. No. 12, pp. 8-14. See
      Chew's letter of Oct. 17, 1817: _Ibid._, pp. 14-16.

 [84] By the secret Joint Resolution and Act of 1811 (_Statutes
      at Large_, III. 471), Congress gave the President power to
      suppress the Amelia Island establishment, which was then
      notorious. The capture was not accomplished until 1817.

 [85] _House Doc._, 16 Cong. 1 sess. III. No. 42, pp. 10-11.
      Cf. Report of the House Committee, Jan. 10, 1818: "It is but
      too notorious that numerous infractions of the law prohibiting
      the importation of slaves into the United States have been
      perpetrated with impunity upon our southern frontier." _Amer.
      State Papers, Miscellaneous_, II. No. 441.

 [86] Special message of Jan. 13, 1818: _House Journal_, 15
      Cong. 1 sess. pp. 137-9.

 [87] Collector McIntosh, of the District of Brunswick, Ga., to
      the Secretary of the Treasury. _House Doc._, 16 Cong. 1 sess.
      III. No. 42, pp. 8-9.

 [88] _House Doc._, 16 Cong. 1 sess. III. No. 42, pp. 6-7.

 [89] _Ibid._, pp. 11-12.

 [90] _Amer. State Papers, Miscellaneous_, II. No. 529.

 [91] _House Doc._, 16 Cong. 1 sess. III. No. 42, p. 7.

 [92] _Ibid._, p. 6.

 [93] _House Reports_, 21 Cong. 1 sess. III. No. 348, p. 82.

 [94] They were not general instructions, but were directed to
      Commander Campbell. Cf. _House Doc._, 15 Cong. 2 sess. IV. No.
      84, pp. 5-6.

 [95] _Statutes at Large_, III. 471 ff.

 [96] _House Doc._, 15 Cong. 2 sess. VI. No. 107, pp. 8-9.

 [97] _Ibid._, IV. No. 84. Cf. Chew's letters in _House
      Reports_, 21 Cong. 1 sess. III. No. 348.

 [98] _House Doc._, 15 Cong. 1 sess. II. No. 12, pp. 22, 38; 15
      Cong. 2 sess. VI. No. 100, p. 13; 16 Cong. 1 sess. III. No.
      42, p. 9, etc.; _House Reports_, 21 Cong. 1 sess. III. No.
      348, p. 85.

 [99] _House Doc._, 15 Cong. 2 sess. VI. No. 107, pp. 8-9.

[100] _House Reports_, 21 Cong. 1 sess. III. No. 348, p. 77.

[101] Cf. _House Doc._, 16 Cong. 1 sess. III. No. 42, p. 11:
      "The Grand Jury found true bills against the owners of the
      vessels, masters, and a supercargo--all of whom are
      discharged; why or wherefore I cannot say, except that it
      could not be for want of proof against them."

[102] E.g., in July, 1818, one informer "will have to leave
      that part of the country to save his life": _Ibid._, 15 Cong.
      2 sess. VI. No. 100, p. 9.

[103] Joseph Nourse, Register of the Treasury, to Hon. W.H.
      Crawford, Secretary of the Treasury: _Ibid._, 15 Cong. 2 sess.
      VI. No. 107, p. 5.

[104] The slaves on the "Constitution" were not condemned, for
      the technical reason that she was not captured by a
      commissioned officer of the United States navy.

[105] These proceedings are very obscure, and little was said
      about them. The Spanish claimants were, it was alleged with
      much probability, but representatives of Americans. The claim
      was paid under the provisions of the Treaty of Florida, and
      included slaves whom the court afterward declared forfeited.

[106] An act to relieve him was finally passed, Feb. 8, 1827,
      nine years after the capture. See _Statutes at Large_, VI.
      357.

[107] It is difficult to get at the exact facts in this
      complicated case. The above statement is, I think, much milder
      than the real facts would warrant, if thoroughly known. Cf.
      _House Reports_, 19 Cong. 1 sess. II. No. 231; 21 Cong. 1
      sess. III. No. 348, pp. 62-3, etc.; 24 Cong. 1 sess. I. No.
      209; _Amer. State Papers, Naval_, II. No. 308.

[108] The first method, represented by the Act of 1818, was
      favored by the South, the Senate, and the Democrats; the
      second method, represented by the Act of 1819, by the North,
      the House, and by the as yet undeveloped but growing Whig
      party.

[109] Committees on the slave-trade were appointed by the
      House in 1810 and 1813; the committee of 1813 recommended a
      revision of the laws, but nothing was done: _Annals of Cong._,
      11 Cong. 3 sess. p. 387; 12 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 1074, 1090. The
      presidential message of 1816 led to committees on the trade in
      both Houses. The committee of the House of Representatives
      reported a joint resolution on abolishing the traffic and
      colonizing the Negroes, also looking toward international
      action. This never came to a vote: _Senate Journal_, 14 Cong.
      2 sess. pp. 46, 179, 180; _House Journal_, 14 Cong. 2 sess.
      pp. 25, 27, 380; _House Doc_, 14 Cong. 2 sess. II. No. 77.
      Finally, the presidential message of 1817 (_House Journal_, 15
      Cong. 1 sess. p. 11), announcing the issuance of orders to
      suppress the Amelia Island establishment, led to two other
      committees in both Houses. The House committee under Middleton
      made a report with a bill (_Amer. State Papers,
      Miscellaneous_, II. No. 441), and the Senate committee also
      reported a bill.

[110] The Senate debates were entirely unreported, and the
      report of the House debates is very meagre. For the
      proceedings, see _Senate Journal_, 15 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 243,
      304, 315, 333, 338, 340, 348, 377, 386, 388, 391, 403, 406;
      _House Journal_, 15 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 19, 20, 29, 51, 92, 131,
      362, 410, 450, 452, 456, 468, 479, 484, 492, 505.

[111] Simkins of South Carolina, Edwards of North Carolina,
      and Pindall: _Annals of Cong._, 15 Cong. 1 sess. p. 1740.

[112] Hugh Nelson of Virginia: _Annals of Cong._, 15 Cong. 1
      sess. p. 1740.

[113] _Statutes at Large_, III. 450. By this act the first six
      sections of the Act of 1807 were repealed.

[114] Or, more accurately speaking, every one realized, in
      view of the increased activity of the trade, that it would be
      a failure.

[115] Nov. 18, 1818, the part of the presidential message
      referring to the slave-trade was given to a committee of the
      House, and this committee also took in hand the House bill of
      the previous session which the Senate bill had replaced:
      _House Journal_, 15 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 9-19, 42, 150, 179, 330,
      334, 341, 343, 352.

[116] Of which little was reported: _Annals of Cong._, 15
      Cong. 2 sess. pp. 1430-31. Strother opposed, "for various
      reasons of expediency," the bounties for captors. Nelson of
      Virginia advocated the death penalty, and, aided by Pindall,
      had it inserted. The vote on the bill was 57 to 45.

[117] The Senate had also had a committee at work on a bill
      which was reported Feb. 8, and finally postponed: _Senate
      Journal_, 15 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 234, 244, 311-2, 347. The House
      bill was taken up March 2: _Annals of Cong._, 15 Cong. 2 sess.
      p. 280.

[118] _Statutes at Large_, III. 532.

[119] _Annals of Cong._, 15 Cong. 2 sess. p. 1430. This
      insured the trial of slave-traders in a sympathetic slave
      State, and resulted in the "disappearance" of many captured
      Negroes.

[120] _Statutes at Large_, III. 533.

[121] The first of a long series of appropriations extending
      to 1869, of which a list is given on the next page. The totals
      are only approximately correct. Some statutes may have escaped
      me, and in the reports of moneys the surpluses of previous
      years are not always clearly distinguishable.

[122] In the first session of the sixteenth Congress, two
      bills on piracy were introduced into the Senate, one of which
      passed, April 26. In the House there was a bill on piracy, and
      a slave-trade committee reported recommending that the
      slave-trade be piracy. The Senate bill and this bill were
      considered in Committee of the Whole, May 11, and a bill was
      finally passed declaring, among other things, the traffic
      piracy. In the Senate there was "some discussion, rather on
      the form than the substance of these amendments," and "they
      were agreed to without a division": _Senate Journal_, 16 Cong.
      1 sess. pp. 238, 241, 268, 287, 314, 331, 346, 350, 409, 412,
      417, 420, 422, 424, 425; _House Journal_, 16 Cong. 1 sess. pp.
      113, 280, 453, 454, 494, 518, 520, 522, 537; _Annals of
      Cong._, 16 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 693-4, 2231, 2236-7, etc. The
      debates were not reported.

[123] _Statutes at Large_, III. 600-1. This act was in reality
      a continuation of the piracy Act of 1819, and was only
      temporary. The provision was, however, continued by several
      acts, and finally made perpetual by the Act of Jan. 30, 1823:
      _Statutes at Large_, III. 510-4, 721. On March 3, 1823, it was
      slightly amended so as to give district courts jurisdiction.

[124] Attorney-General Wirt advised him, October, 1819, that
      no part of the appropriation could be used to purchase land in
      Africa or tools for the Negroes, or as salary for the agent:
      _Opinions of Attorneys-General_, I. 314-7. Monroe laid the
      case before Congress in a special message Dec. 20, 1819
      (_House Journal_, 16 Cong. 1 sess. p. 57); but no action was
      taken there.

[125] Cf. Kendall's Report, August, 1830: _Senate Doc._, 21
      Cong. 2 sess. I. No. 1, pp. 211-8; also see below, Chapter X.

[126] Speech in the House of Representatives, Feb. 15, 1819,
      p. 18; published in Boston, 1849.

[127] Jay, _Inquiry into American Colonization_ (1838), p. 59,
      note.

[128] Quoted in Friends' _Facts and Observations on the Slave
      Trade_ (ed. 1841), pp. 7-8.

[129] _Annals of Cong._, 16 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 270-1.

[130] _Ibid._, p. 698.

[131] _Ibid._, p. 1207.

[132] _Annals of Cong._, 16 Cong. 1 sess. p. 1433.

[133] Referring particularly to the case of the slaver
      "Plattsburg." Cf. _House Reports_, 17 Cong. 1 sess. II. No.
      92, p. 10.

[134] _House Reports_, 17 Cong. 1 sess. II. No. 92, p. 2. The
      President had in his message spoken in exhilarating tones of
      the success of the government in suppressing the trade. The
      House Committee appointed in pursuance of this passage made
      the above report. Their conclusions are confirmed by British
      reports: _Parliamentary Papers_, 1822, Vol. XXII., _Slave
      Trade_, Further Papers, III. p. 44. So, too, in 1823, Ashmun,
      the African agent, reports that thousands of slaves are being
      abducted.

[135] Ayres to the Secretary of the Navy, Feb. 24, 1823;
      reprinted in _Friends' View of the African Slave-Trade_
      (1824), p. 31.

[136] _House Reports_, 17 Cong. 1 sess. II. No. 92, pp. 5-6.
      The slavers were the "Ramirez," "Endymion," "Esperanza,"
      "Plattsburg," "Science," "Alexander," "Eugene," "Mathilde,"
      "Daphne," "Eliza," and "La PensÃ©e." In these 573 Africans were
      taken. The naval officers were greatly handicapped by the size
      of the ships, etc. (cf. _Friends' View_, etc., pp. 33-41).
      They nevertheless acted with great zeal.

[137] _Parliamentary Papers_, 1821, Vol. XXIII., _Slave
      Trade_, Further Papers, A, p. 76. The names and description of
      a dozen or more American slavers are given: _Ibid._, pp.
      18-21.

[138] _House Reports_, 17 Cong. 1 sess. II. No. 92, pp. 15-20.

[139] _House Doc._, 18 Cong. 1 sess. VI. No. 119, p. 13.

[140] _Parliamentary Papers_, 1823, Vol. XVIII., _Slave
      Trade_, Further Papers, A, pp. 10-11.

[141] _Opinions of Attorneys-General_, V. 717.

[142] R.W. Habersham to the Secretary of the Navy, August,
      1821; reprinted in _Friends' View_, etc., p. 47.

[143] _Ibid._, p. 42.

[144] _Ibid._, p. 43.

[145] Cf. above, pp. 126-7.

[146] _Friends' View_, etc., p. 42.

[147] A few accounts of captures here and there would make the
      matter less suspicious; these, however, do not occur. How
      large this suspected illicit traffic was, it is of course
      impossible to say; there is no reason why it may not have
      reached many hundreds per year.

[148] Cf. editorial in _Niles's Register_, XXII. 114. Cf. also
      the following instances of pardons:--

      PRESIDENT JEFFERSON: March 1, 1808, Phillip M. Topham,
      convicted for "carrying on an illegal slave-trade" (pardoned
      twice). _Pardons and Remissions_, I. 146, 148-9.

      PRESIDENT MADISON: July 29, 1809, fifteen vessels arrived at
      New Orleans from Cuba, with 666 white persons and 683 negroes.
      Every penalty incurred under the Act of 1807 was remitted.
      (Note: "Several other pardons of this nature were granted.")
      _Ibid._, I. 179.

      Nov. 8, 1809, John Hopkins and Lewis Le Roy, convicted for
      importing a slave. _Ibid._, I. 184-5.

      Feb. 12, 1810, William Sewall, convicted for importing slaves.
      _Ibid._, I. 194, 235, 240.

      May 5, 1812, William Babbit, convicted for importing slaves.
      _Ibid._, I. 248.

      PRESIDENT MONROE: June 11, 1822, Thomas Shields, convicted for
      bringing slaves into New Orleans. _Ibid._, IV. 15.

      Aug. 24, 1822, J.F. Smith, sentenced to five years'
      imprisonment and $3000 fine; served twenty-five months and was
      then pardoned. _Ibid._, IV. 22.

      July 23, 1823, certain parties liable to penalties for
      introducing slaves into Alabama. _Ibid._, IV. 63.

      Aug. 15, 1823, owners of schooner "Mary," convicted of
      importing slaves. _Ibid._, IV. 66.

      PRESIDENT J.Q. ADAMS: March 4, 1826, Robert Perry; his ship
      was forfeited for slave-trading. _Ibid._, IV. 140.

      Jan. 17, 1827, Jesse Perry; forfeited ship, and was convicted
      for introducing slaves. _Ibid._, IV. 158.

      Feb. 13, 1827, Zenas Winston; incurred penalties for
      slave-trading. _Ibid._, IV. 161. The four following cases are
      similar to that of Winston:--

      Feb. 24, 1827, John Tucker and William Morbon. _Ibid._, IV.
      162.

      March 25, 1828, Joseph Badger. _Ibid._, IV. 192.

      Feb. 19, 1829, L.R. Wallace. _Ibid._, IV. 215.

      PRESIDENT JACKSON: Five cases. _Ibid._, IV. 225, 270, 301,
      393, 440.

      The above cases were taken from manuscript copies of the
      Washington records, made by Mr. W.C. Endicott, Jr., and kindly
      loaned me.

[149] See _Senate Journal_, 20 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 60, 66, 340,
      341, 343, 348, 352, 355; _House Journal_, 20 Cong. 1 sess. pp.
      59, 76, 123, 134, 156, 169, 173, 279, 634, 641, 646, 647, 688,
      692.

[150] _Statutes at Large_, VI. 376.

[151] Among interesting minor proceedings in this period were
      two Senate bills to register slaves so as to prevent illegal
      importation. They were both dropped in the House; a House
      proposition to the same effect also came to nothing: _Senate
      Journal_, 15 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 147, 152, 157, 165, 170, 188,
      201, 203, 232, 237; 15 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 63, 74, 77, 202, 207,
      285, 291, 297; _House Journal_, 15 Cong. 1 sess. p. 332; 15
      Cong. 2 sess. pp. 303, 305, 316; 16 Cong. 1 sess. p. 150.
      Another proposition was contained in the Meigs resolution
      presented to the House, Feb. 5, 1820, which proposed to devote
      the public lands to the suppression of the slave-trade. This
      was ruled out of order. It was presented again and laid on the
      table in 1821: _House Journal_, 16 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 196, 200,
      227; 16 Cong. 2 sess. p. 238.

                    *       *       *       *       *




_Chapter IX_

THE INTERNATIONAL STATUS OF THE SLAVE-TRADE.

1783-1862.

  66. The Rise of the Movement against the Slave-Trade, 1788-1807.
  67. Concerted Action of the Powers, 1783-1814.
  68. Action of the Powers from 1814 to 1820.
  69. The Struggle for an International Right of Search, 1820-1840.
  70. Negotiations of 1823-1825.
  71. The Attitude of the United States and the State of the Slave-Trade.
  72. The Quintuple Treaty, 1839-1842.
  73. Final Concerted Measures, 1842-1862.


66. ~The Rise of the Movement against the Slave-Trade, 1788-1807.~ At
the beginning of the nineteenth century England held 800,000 slaves in
her colonies; France, 250,000; Denmark, 27,000; Spain and Portugal,
600,000; Holland, 50,000; Sweden, 600; there were also about 2,000,000
slaves in Brazil, and about 900,000 in the United States.[1] This was
the powerful basis of the demand for the slave-trade; and against the
economic forces which these four and a half millions of enforced
laborers represented, the battle for freedom had to be fought.

Denmark first responded to the denunciatory cries of the eighteenth
century against slavery and the slave-trade. In 1792, by royal order,
this traffic was prohibited in the Danish possessions after 1802. The
principles of the French Revolution logically called for the extinction
of the slave system by France. This was, however, accomplished more
precipitately than the Convention anticipated; and in a whirl of
enthusiasm engendered by the appearance of the Dominican deputies,
slavery and the slave-trade were abolished in all French colonies
February 4, 1794.[2] This abolition was short-lived; for at the command
of the First Consul slavery and the slave-trade was restored in An X
(1799).[3] The trade was finally abolished by Napoleon during the
Hundred Days by a decree, March 29, 1815, which briefly declared: "Ã
dater de la publication du prÃ©sent DÃ©cret, la Traite des Noirs est
abolie."[4] The Treaty of Paris eventually confirmed this law.[5]

In England, the united efforts of Sharpe, Clarkson, and Wilberforce
early began to arouse public opinion by means of agitation and pamphlet
literature. May 21, 1788, Sir William Dolben moved a bill regulating the
trade, which passed in July and was the last English measure
countenancing the traffic.[6] The report of the Privy Council on the
subject in 1789[7] precipitated the long struggle. On motion of Pitt, in
1788, the House had resolved to take up at the next session the question
of the abolition of the trade.[8] It was, accordingly, called up by
Wilberforce, and a remarkable parliamentary battle ensued, which lasted
continuously until 1805. The Grenville-Fox ministry now espoused the
cause. This ministry first prohibited the trade with such colonies as
England had acquired by conquest during the Napoleonic wars; then, in
1806, they prohibited the foreign slave-trade; and finally, March 25,
1807, enacted the total abolition of the traffic.[9]


67. ~Concerted Action of the Powers, 1783-1814.~ During the peace
negotiations between the United States and Great Britain in 1783, it was
proposed by Jay, in June, that there be a proviso inserted as follows:
"Provided that the subjects of his Britannic Majesty shall not have any
right or claim under the convention, to carry or import, into the said
States any slaves from any part of the world; it being the intention of
the said States entirely to prohibit the importation thereof."[10] Fox
promptly replied: "If that be their policy, it never can be competent to
us to dispute with them their own regulations."[11] No mention of this
was, however, made in the final treaty, probably because it was thought
unnecessary.

In the proposed treaty of 1806, signed at London December 31, Article 24
provided that "The high contracting parties engage to communicate to
each other, without delay, all such laws as have been or shall be
hereafter enacted by their respective Legislatures, as also all measures
which shall have been taken for the abolition or limitation of the
African slave trade; and they further agree to use their best endeavors
to procure the co-operation of other Powers for the final and complete
abolition of a trade so repugnant to the principles of justice and
humanity."[12]

This marks the beginning of a long series of treaties between England
and other powers looking toward the prohibition of the traffic by
international agreement. During the years 1810-1814 she signed treaties
relating to the subject with Portugal, Denmark, and Sweden.[13] May 30,
1814, an additional article to the Treaty of Paris, between France and
Great Britain, engaged these powers to endeavor to induce the
approaching Congress at Vienna "to decree the abolition of the Slave
Trade, so that the said Trade shall cease universally, as it shall cease
definitively, under any circumstances, on the part of the French
Government, in the course of 5 years; and that during the said period no
Slave Merchant shall import or sell Slaves, except in the Colonies of
the State of which he is a Subject."[14] In addition to this, the next
day a circular letter was despatched by Castlereagh to Austria, Russia,
and Prussia, expressing the hope "that the Powers of Europe, when
restoring Peace to Europe, with one common interest, will crown this
great work by interposing their benign offices in favour of those
Regions of the Globe, which yet continue to be desolated by this
unnatural and inhuman traffic."[15] Meantime additional treaties were
secured: in 1814 by royal decree Netherlands agreed to abolish the
trade;[16] Spain was induced by her necessities to restrain her trade to
her own colonies, and to endeavor to prevent the fraudulent use of her
flag by foreigners;[17] and in 1815 Portugal agreed to abolish the
slave-trade north of the equator.[18]


68. ~Action of the Powers from 1814 to 1820.~ At the Congress of Vienna,
which assembled late in 1814, Castlereagh was indefatigable in his
endeavors to secure the abolition of the trade. France and Spain,
however, refused to yield farther than they had already done, and the
other powers hesitated to go to the lengths he recommended.
Nevertheless, he secured the institution of annual conferences on the
matter, and a declaration by the Congress strongly condemning the trade
and declaring that "the public voice in all civilized countries was
raised to demand its suppression as soon as possible," and that, while
the definitive period of termination would be left to subsequent
negotiation, the sovereigns would not consider their work done until the
trade was entirely suppressed.[19]

In the Treaty of Ghent, between Great Britain and the United States,
ratified February 17, 1815, Article 10, proposed by Great Britain,
declared that, "Whereas the traffic in slaves is irreconcilable with the
principles of humanity and justice," the two countries agreed to use
their best endeavors in abolishing the trade.[20] The final overthrow of
Napoleon was marked by a second declaration of the powers, who,
"desiring to give effect to the measures on which they deliberated at
the Congress of Vienna, relative to the complete and universal
abolition of the Slave Trade, and having, each in their respective
Dominions, prohibited without restriction their Colonies and Subjects
from taking any part whatever in this Traffic, engage to renew
conjointly their efforts, with the view of securing final success to
those principles which they proclaimed in the Declaration of the 4th
February, 1815, and of concerting, without loss of time, through their
Ministers at the Courts of London and of Paris, the most effectual
measures for the entire and definitive abolition of a Commerce so
odious, and so strongly condemned by the laws of religion and of
nature."[21]

Treaties further restricting the trade continued to be made by Great
Britain: Spain abolished the trade north of the equator in 1817,[22] and
promised entire abolition in 1820; Spain, Portugal, and Holland also
granted a mutual limited Right of Search to England, and joined in
establishing mixed courts.[23] The effort, however, to secure a general
declaration of the powers urging, if not compelling, the abolition of
the trade in 1820, as well as the attempt to secure a qualified
international Right of Visit, failed, although both propositions were
strongly urged by England at the Conference of 1818.[24]


69. ~The Struggle for an International Right of Search, 1820-1840.~
Whatever England's motives were, it is certain that only a limited
international Right of Visit on the high seas could suppress or greatly
limit the slave-trade. Her diplomacy was therefore henceforth directed
to this end. On the other hand, the maritime supremacy of England, so
successfully asserted during the Napoleonic wars, would, in case a Right
of Search were granted, virtually make England the policeman of the
seas; and if nations like the United States had already, under present
conditions, had just cause to complain of violations by England of their
rights on the seas, might not any extension of rights by international
agreement be dangerous? It was such considerations that for many years
brought the powers to a dead-lock in their efforts to suppress the
slave-trade.

At first it looked as if England might attempt, by judicial decisions in
her own courts, to seize even foreign slavers.[25] After the war,
however, her courts disavowed such action,[26] and the right was sought
for by treaty stipulation. Castlereagh took early opportunity to
approach the United States on the matter, suggesting to Minister Rush,
June 20, 1818, a mutual but strictly limited Right of Search.[27] Rush
was ordered to give him assurances of the solicitude of the United
States to suppress the traffic, but to state that the concessions asked
for appeared of a character not adaptable to our institutions.
Negotiations were then transferred to Washington; and the new British
minister, Mr. Stratford Canning, approached Adams with full instructions
in December, 1820.[28]

Meantime, it had become clear to many in the United States that the
individual efforts of States could never suppress or even limit the
trade without systematic co-operation. In 1817 a committee of the House
had urged the opening of negotiations looking toward such international
co-operation,[29] and a Senate motion to the same effect had caused long
debate.[30] In 1820 and 1821 two House committee reports, one of which
recommended the granting of a Right of Search, were adopted by the
House, but failed in the Senate.[31] Adams, notwithstanding this, saw
constitutional objections to the plan proposed by Canning, and wrote to
him, December 30: "A Compact, giving the power to the Naval Officers of
one Nation to search the Merchant Vessels of another for Offenders and
offences against the Laws of the latter, backed by a further power to
seize and carry into a Foreign Port, and there subject to the decision
of a Tribunal composed of at least one half Foreigners, irresponsible to
the Supreme Corrective tribunal of this Union, and not amendable to the
controul of impeachment for official misdemeanors, was an investment of
power, over the persons, property and reputation of the Citizens of this
Country, not only unwarranted by any delegation of Sovereign Power to
the National Government, but so adverse to the elementary principles and
indispensable securities of individual rights, ... that not even the
most unqualified approbation of the ends ... could justify the
transgression." He then suggested co-operation of the fleets on the
coast of Africa, a proposal which was promptly accepted.[32]

The slave-trade was again a subject of international consideration at
the Congress of Verona in 1822. Austria, France, Great Britain, Russia,
and Prussia were represented. The English delegates declared that,
although only Portugal and Brazil allowed the trade, yet the traffic was
at that moment carried on to a greater extent than ever before. They
said that in seven months of the year 1821 no less than 21,000 slaves
were abducted, and three hundred and fifty-two vessels entered African
ports north of the equator. "It is obvious," said they, "that this crime
is committed in contravention of the Laws of every Country of Europe,
and of America, excepting only of one, and that it requires something
more than the ordinary operation of Law to prevent it." England
therefore recommended:--

1. That each country denounce the trade as piracy, with a view of
founding upon the aggregate of such separate declarations a general law
to be incorporated in the Law of Nations.

2. A withdrawing of the flags of the Powers from persons not natives of
these States, who engage in the traffic under the flags of these States.

3. A refusal to admit to their domains the produce of the colonies of
States allowing the trade, a measure which would apply to Portugal and
Brazil alone.

These proposals were not accepted. Austria would agree to the first two
only; France refused to denounce the trade as piracy; and Prussia was
non-committal. The utmost that could be gained was another denunciation
of the trade couched in general terms.[33]


70. ~Negotiations of 1823-1825.~ England did not, however, lose hope of
gaining some concession from the United States. Another House committee
had, in 1822, reported that the only method of suppressing the trade was
by granting a Right of Search.[34] The House agreed, February 28, 1823,
to request the President to enter into negotiations with the maritime
powers of Europe to denounce the slave-trade as piracy; an amendment
"that we agree to a qualified right of search" was, however, lost.[35]
Meantime, the English minister was continually pressing the matter upon
Adams, who proposed in turn to denounce the trade as piracy. Canning
agreed to this, but only on condition that it be piracy under the Law of
Nations and not merely by statute law. Such an agreement, he said, would
involve a Right of Search for its enforcement; he proposed strictly to
limit and define this right, to allow captured ships to be tried in
their own courts, and not to commit the United States in any way to the
question of the belligerent Right of Search. Adams finally sent a draft
of a proposed treaty to England, and agreed to recognize the
slave-traffic "as piracy under the law of nations, namely: that,
although seizable by the officers and authorities of every nation, they
should be triable only by the tribunals of the country of the slave
trading vessel."[36]

Rush presented this _project_ to the government in January, 1824.
England agreed to all the points insisted on by the United States; viz.,
that she herself should denounce the trade as piracy; that slavers
should be tried in their own country; that the captor should be laid
under the most effective responsibility for his conduct; and that
vessels under convoy of a ship of war of their own country should be
exempt from search. In addition, England demanded that citizens of
either country captured under the flag of a third power should be sent
home for trial, and that citizens of either country chartering vessels
of a third country should come under these stipulations.[37]

This convention was laid before the Senate April 30, 1824, but was not
acted upon until May 21, when it was so amended as to make it terminable
at six months' notice. The same day, President Monroe, "apprehending,
from the delay in the decision, that some difficulty exists," sent a
special message to the Senate, giving at length the reasons for signing
the treaty, and saying that "should this Convention be adopted, there is
every reason to believe, that it will be the commencement of a system
destined to accomplish the entire Abolition of the Slave Trade." It was,
however, a time of great political pot-boiling, and consequently an
unfortunate occasion to ask senators to settle any great question. A
systematic attack, led by Johnson of Louisiana, was made on all the
vital provisions of the treaty: the waters of America were excepted from
its application, and those of the West Indies barely escaped exception;
the provision which, perhaps, aimed the deadliest blow at American
slave-trade interests was likewise struck out; namely, the application
of the Right of Search to citizens chartering the vessels of a third
nation.[38]

The convention thus mutilated was not signed by England, who demanded as
the least concession the application of the Right of Search to American
waters. Meantime the United States had invited nearly all nations to
denounce the trade as piracy; and the President, the Secretary of the
Navy, and a House committee had urgently favored the granting of the
Right of Search. The bad faith of Congress, however, in the matter of
the Colombian treaty broke off for a time further negotiations with
England.[39]


71. ~The Attitude of the United States and the State of the
Slave-Trade.~ In 1824 the Right of Search was established between
England and Sweden, and in 1826 Brazil promised to abolish the trade in
three years.[40] In 1831 the cause was greatly advanced by the signing
of a treaty between Great Britain and France, granting mutually a
geographically limited Right of Search.[41] This led, in the next few
years, to similar treaties with Denmark, Sardinia,[42] the Hanse
towns,[43] and Naples.[44] Such measures put the trade more and more in
the hands of Americans, and it began greatly to increase. Mercer sought
repeatedly in the House to have negotiations reopened with England, but
without success.[45] Indeed, the chances of success were now for many
years imperilled by the recurrence of deliberate search of American
vessels by the British.[46] In the majority of cases the vessels proved
to be slavers, and some of them fraudulently flew the American flag;
nevertheless, their molestation by British cruisers created much
feeling, and hindered all steps toward an understanding: the United
States was loath to have her criminal negligence in enforcing her own
laws thus exposed by foreigners. Other international questions connected
with the trade also strained the relations of the two countries: three
different vessels engaged in the domestic slave-trade, driven by stress
of weather, or, in the "Creole" case, captured by Negroes on board,
landed slaves in British possessions; England freed them, and refused to
pay for such as were landed after emancipation had been proclaimed in
the West Indies.[47] The case of the slaver "L'Amistad" also raised
difficulties with Spain. This Spanish vessel, after the Negroes on board
had mutinied and killed their owners, was seized by a United States
vessel and brought into port for adjudication. The court, however, freed
the Negroes, on the ground that under Spanish law they were not legally
slaves; and although the Senate repeatedly tried to indemnify the
owners, the project did not succeed.[48]

Such proceedings well illustrate the new tendency of the pro-slavery
party to neglect the enforcement of the slave-trade laws, in a frantic
defence of the remotest ramparts of slave property. Consequently, when,
after the treaty of 1831, France and England joined in urging the
accession of the United States to it, the British minister was at last
compelled to inform Palmerston, December, 1833, that "the Executive at
Washington appears to shrink from bringing forward, in any shape, a
question, upon which depends the completion of their former object--the
utter and universal Abolition of the Slave Trade--from an apprehension
of alarming the Southern States."[49] Great Britain now offered to sign
the proposed treaty of 1824 as amended; but even this Forsyth refused,
and stated that the United States had determined not to become "a party
of any Convention on the subject of the Slave Trade."[50]

Estimates as to the extent of the slave-trade agree that the traffic to
North and South America in 1820 was considerable, certainly not much
less than 40,000 slaves annually. From that time to about 1825 it
declined somewhat, but afterward increased enormously, so that by 1837
the American importation was estimated as high as 200,000 Negroes
annually. The total abolition of the African trade by American countries
then brought the traffic down to perhaps 30,000 in 1842. A large and
rapid increase of illicit traffic followed; so that by 1847 the
importation amounted to nearly 100,000 annually. One province of Brazil
is said to have received 173,000 in the years 1846-1849. In the decade
1850-1860 this activity in slave-trading continued, and reached very
large proportions.

The traffic thus carried on floated under the flags of France, Spain,
and Portugal, until about 1830; from 1830 to 1840 it began gradually to
assume the United States flag; by 1845, a large part of the trade was
under the stars and stripes; by 1850 fully one-half the trade, and in
the decade, 1850-1860 nearly all the traffic, found this flag its best
protection.[51]


72. ~The Quintuple Treaty, 1839-1842.~ In 1839 Pope Gregory XVI.
stigmatized the slave-trade "as utterly unworthy of the Christian name;"
and at the same time, although proscribed by the laws of every civilized
State, the trade was flourishing with pristine vigor. Great advantage
was given the traffic by the fact that the United States, for two
decades after the abortive attempt of 1824, refused to co-operate with
the rest of the civilized world, and allowed her flag to shelter and
protect the slave-trade. If a fully equipped slaver sailed from New
York, Havana, Rio Janeiro, or Liverpool, she had only to hoist the stars
and stripes in order to proceed unmolested on her piratical voyage; for
there was seldom a United States cruiser to be met with, and there were,
on the other hand, diplomats at Washington so jealous of the honor of
the flag that they would prostitute it to crime rather than allow an
English or a French cruiser in any way to interfere. Without doubt, the
contention of the United States as to England's pretensions to a Right
of Visit was technically correct. Nevertheless, it was clear that if the
slave-trade was to be suppressed, each nation must either zealously keep
her flag from fraudulent use, or, as a labor-saving device, depute to
others this duty for limited places and under special circumstances. A
failure of any one nation to do one of these two things meant that the
efforts of all other nations were to be fruitless. The United States had
invited the world to join her in denouncing the slave-trade as piracy;
yet, when such a pirate was waylaid by an English vessel, the United
States complained or demanded reparation. The only answer which this
country for years returned to the long-continued exposures of American
slave-traders and of the fraudulent use of the American flag, was a
recital of cases where Great Britain had gone beyond her legal powers in
her attempt to suppress the slave-trade.[52] In the face of overwhelming
evidence to the contrary, Secretary of State Forsyth declared, in 1840,
that the duty of the United States in the matter of the slave-trade "has
been faithfully performed, and if the traffic still exists as a disgrace
to humanity, it is to be imputed to nations with whom Her Majesty's
Government has formed and maintained the most intimate connexions, and
to whose Governments Great Britain has paid for the right of active
intervention in order to its complete extirpation."[53] So zealous was
Stevenson, our minister to England, in denying the Right of Search, that
he boldly informed Palmerston, in 1841, "that there is no shadow of
pretence for excusing, much less justifying, the exercise of any such
right. That it is wholly immaterial, whether the vessels be equipped
for, or actually engaged in slave traffic or not, and consequently the
right to search or detain even slave vessels, must be confined to the
ships or vessels of those nations with whom it may have treaties on the
subject."[54] Palmerston courteously replied that he could not think
that the United States seriously intended to make its flag a refuge for
slave-traders;[55] and Aberdeen pertinently declared: "Now, it can
scarcely be maintained by Mr. Stevenson that Great Britain should be
bound to permit her own subjects, with British vessels and British
capital, to carry on, before the eyes of British officers, this
detestable traffic in human beings, which the law has declared to be
piracy, merely because they had the audacity to commit an additional
offence by fraudulently usurping the American flag."[56] Thus the
dispute, even after the advent of Webster, went on for a time, involving
itself in metaphysical subtleties, and apparently leading no nearer to
an understanding.[57]

In 1838 a fourth conference of the powers for the consideration of the
slave-trade took place at London. It was attended by representatives of
England, France, Russia, Prussia, and Austria. England laid the _projet_
of a treaty before them, to which all but France assented. This
so-called Quintuple Treaty, signed December 20, 1841, denounced the
slave-trade as piracy, and declared that "the High Contracting Parties
agree by common consent, that those of their ships of war which shall be
provided with special warrants and orders ... may search every
merchant-vessel belonging to any one of the High Contracting Parties
which shall, on reasonable grounds, be suspected of being engaged in the
traffic in slaves." All captured slavers were to be sent to their own
countries for trial.[58]

While the ratification of this treaty was pending, the United States
minister to France, Lewis Cass, addressed an official note to Guizot at
the French foreign office, protesting against the institution of an
international Right of Search, and rather grandiloquently warning the
powers against the use of force to accomplish their ends.[59] This
extraordinary epistle, issued on the minister's own responsibility,
brought a reply denying that the creation of any "new principle of
international law, whereby the vessels even of those powers which have
not participated in the arrangement should be subjected to the right of
search," was ever intended, and affirming that no such extraordinary
interpretation could be deduced from the Convention. Moreover, M. Guizot
hoped that the United States, by agreeing to this treaty, would "aid, by
its most sincere endeavors, in the definitive abolition of the
trade."[60] Cass's theatrical protest was, consciously or unconsciously,
the manifesto of that growing class in the United States who wanted no
further measures taken for the suppression of the slave-trade; toward
that, as toward the institution of slavery, this party favored a policy
of strict _laissez-faire_.


73. ~Final Concerted Measures, 1842-1862.~ The Treaty of Washington, in
1842, made the first effective compromise in the matter and broke the
unpleasant dead-lock, by substituting joint cruising by English and
American squadrons for the proposed grant of a Right of Search. In
submitting this treaty, Tyler said: "The treaty which I now submit to
you proposes no alteration, mitigation, or modification of the rules of
the law of nations. It provides simply that each of the two Governments
shall maintain on the coast of Africa a sufficient squadron to enforce
separately and respectively the laws, rights, and obligations of the two
countries for the suppression of the slave trade."[61] This provision
was a part of the treaty to settle the boundary disputes with England.
In the Senate, Benton moved to strike out this article; but the attempt
was defeated by a vote of 37 to 12, and the treaty was ratified.[62]

This stipulation of the treaty of 1842 was never properly carried out by
the United States for any length of time.[63] Consequently the same
difficulties as to search and visit by English vessels continued to
recur. Cases like the following were frequent. The "Illinois," of
Gloucester, Massachusetts, while lying at Whydah, Africa, was boarded by
a British officer, but having American papers was unmolested. Three days
later she hoisted Spanish colors and sailed away with a cargo of slaves.
Next morning she fell in with another British vessel and hoisted
American colors; the British ship had then no right to molest her; but
the captain of the slaver feared that she would, and therefore ran his
vessel aground, slaves and all. The senior English officer reported that
"had Lieutenant Cumberland brought to and boarded the 'Illinois,'
notwithstanding the American colors which she hoisted,... the American
master of the 'Illinois' ... would have complained to his Government of
the detention of his vessel."[64] Again, a vessel which had been boarded
by British officers and found with American flag and papers was, a
little later, captured under the Spanish flag with four hundred and
thirty slaves. She had in the interim complained to the United States
government of the boarding.[65]

Meanwhile, England continued to urge the granting of a Right of Search,
claiming that the stand of the United States really amounted to the
wholesale protection of pirates under her flag.[66] The United States
answered by alleging that even the Treaty of 1842 had been misconstrued
by England,[67] whereupon there was much warm debate in Congress, and
several attempts were made to abrogate the slave-trade article of the
treaty.[68] The pro-slavery party had become more and more suspicious of
England's motives, since they had seen her abolition of the slave-trade
blossom into abolition of the system itself, and they seized every
opportunity to prevent co-operation with her. At the same time, European
interest in the question showed some signs of weakening, and no decided
action was taken. In 1845 France changed her Right of Search
stipulations of 1833 to one for joint cruising,[69] while the Germanic
Federation,[70] Portugal,[71] and Chili[72]enounced the trade as piracy.
In 1844 Texas granted the Right of Search to England,[73] and in 1845
Belgium signed the Quintuple Treaty.[74]

Discussion between England and the United States was revived when Cass
held the State portfolio, and, strange to say, the author of "Cass's
Protest" went farther than any of his predecessors in acknowledging the
justice of England's demands. Said he, in 1859: "If The United States
maintained that, by carrying their flag at her masthead, any vessel
became thereby entitled to the immunity which belongs to American
vessels, they might well be reproached with assuming a position which
would go far towards shielding crimes upon the ocean from punishment;
but they advance no such pretension, while they concede that, if in the
honest examination of a vessel sailing under American colours, but
accompanied by strongly-marked suspicious circumstances, a mistake is
made, and she is found to be entitled to the flag she bears, but no
injury is committed, and the conduct of the boarding party is
irreproachable, no Government would be likely to make a case thus
exceptional in its character a subject of serious reclamation."[75]
While admitting this and expressing a desire to co-operate in the
suppression of the slave-trade, Cass nevertheless steadily refused all
further overtures toward a mutual Right of Search.

The increase of the slave-traffic was so great in the decade 1850-1860
that Lord John Russell proposed to the governments of the United States,
France, Spain, Portugal, and Brazil, that they instruct their ministers
to meet at London in May or June, 1860, to consider measures for the
final abolition of the trade. He stated: "It is ascertained, by
repeated instances, that the practice is for vessels to sail under the
American flag. If the flag is rightly assumed, and the papers correct,
no British cruizer can touch them. If no slaves are on board, even
though the equipment, the fittings, the water-casks, and other
circumstances prove that the ship is on a Slave Trade venture, no
American cruizer can touch them."[76] Continued representations of this
kind were made to the paralyzed United States government; indeed, the
slave-trade of the world seemed now to float securely under her flag.
Nevertheless, Cass refused even to participate in the proposed
conference, and later refused to accede to a proposal for joint cruising
off the coast of Cuba.[77] Great Britain offered to relieve the United
States of any embarrassment by receiving all captured Africans into the
West Indies; but President Buchanan "could not contemplate any such
arrangement," and obstinately refused to increase the suppressing
squadron.[78]

On the outbreak of the Civil War, the Lincoln administration, through
Secretary Seward, immediately expressed a willingness to do all in its
power to suppress the slave-trade.[79] Accordingly, June 7, 1862, a
treaty was signed with Great Britain granting a mutual limited Right of
Search, and establishing mixed courts for the trial of offenders at the
Cape of Good Hope, Sierra Leone, and New York.[80] The efforts of a
half-century of diplomacy were finally crowned; Seward wrote to Adams,
"Had such a treaty been made in 1808, there would now have been no
sedition here."[81]


FOOTNOTES:

  [1] Cf. Augustine Cochin, in Lalor, _Cyclopedia_, III. 723.

  [2] By a law of Aug. 11, 1792, the encouragement formerly
      given to the trade was stopped. Cf. _Choix de rapports,
      opinions et discours prononcÃ©s Ã  la tribune nationale depuis
      1789_ (Paris, 1821), XIV. 425; quoted in Cochin, _The Results
      of Emancipation_ (Booth's translation, 1863), pp. 33, 35-8.

  [3] Cochin, _The Results of Emancipation_ (Booth's
      translation, 1863), pp. 42-7.

  [4] _British and Foreign State Papers_, 1815-6, p. 196.

  [5] _Ibid._, pp. 195-9, 292-3; 1816-7, p. 755. It was
      eventually confirmed by royal ordinance, and the law of April
      15, 1818.

  [6] _Statute 28 George III._, ch. 54. Cf. _Statute 29 George
      III._, ch. 66.

  [7] Various petitions had come in praying for an abolition of
      the slave-trade; and by an order in Council, Feb. 11, 1788, a
      committee of the Privy Council was ordered to take evidence on
      the subject. This committee presented an elaborate report in
      1739. See published _Report_, London, 1789.

  [8] For the history of the Parliamentary struggle, cf.
      Clarkson's and Copley's histories. The movement was checked in
      the House of Commons in 1789, 1790, and 1791. In 1792 the
      House of Commons resolved to abolish the trade in 1796. The
      Lords postponed the matter to take evidence. A bill to
      prohibit the foreign slave-trade was lost in 1793, passed the
      next session, and was lost in the House of Lords. In 1795,
      1796, 1798, and 1799 repeated attempts to abolish the trade
      were defeated. The matter then rested until 1804, when the
      battle was renewed with more success.

  [9] _Statute 46 George III._, ch. 52, 119; _47 George III._,
      sess. I. ch. 36.

 [10] Sparks, _Diplomatic Correspondence_, X. 154.

 [11] Fox to Hartley, June 10, 1783; quoted in Bancroft,
      _History of the Constitution of the United States_, I. 61.

 [12] _Amer. State Papers, Foreign_, III. No. 214, p. 151.

 [13] _British and Foreign State Papers_, 1815-6, pp. 886, 937
      (quotation).

 [14] _Ibid._, pp. 890-1.

 [15] _British and Foreign State Papers_, 1815-6, p. 887.
      Russia, Austria, and Prussia returned favorable replies:
      _Ibid._, pp. 887-8.

 [16] _Ibid._, p. 889.

 [17] She desired a loan, which England made on this condition:
      _Ibid._, pp. 921-2.

 [18] _Ibid._, pp. 937-9. Certain financial arrangements
      secured this concession.

 [19] _Ibid._, pp. 939-75

 [20] _Amer. State Papers, Foreign_, III. No. 271, pp. 735-48;
      _U.S. Treaties and Conventions_ (ed. 1889), p. 405.

 [21] This was inserted in the Treaty of Paris, Nov. 20, 1815:
      _British and Foreign State Papers_, 1815-6, p. 292.

 [22] _Ibid._, 1816-7, pp. 33-74 (English version, 1823-4, p.
      702 ff.).

 [23] Cf. _Ibid._, 1817-8, p. 125 ff.

 [24] This was the first meeting of the London ministers of the
      powers according to agreement; they assembled Dec. 4, 1817,
      and finally called a meeting of plenipotentiaries on the
      question of suppression at Aix-la-Chapelle, beginning Oct. 24,
      1818. Among those present were Metternich, Richelieu,
      Wellington, Castlereagh, Hardenberg, Bernstorff, Nesselrode,
      and Capodistrias. Castlereagh made two propositions: 1. That
      the five powers join in urging Portugal and Brazil to abolish
      the trade May 20, 1820; 2. That the powers adopt the principle
      of a mutual qualified Right of Search. Cf. _British and
      Foreign State Papers_, 1818-9, pp. 21-88; _Amer. State Papers,
      Foreign_, V. No. 346, pp. 113-122.

 [25] For cases, see _1 Acton_, 240, the "Amedie," and _1
      Dodson_, 81, the "Fortuna;" quoted in U.S. Reports, _10
      Wheaton_, 66.

 [26] Cf. the case of the French ship "Le Louis": _2 Dodson_,
      238; and also the case of the "San Juan Nepomuceno": _1
      Haggard_, 267.

 [27] _British and Foreign State Papers_, 1819-20, pp. 375-9;
      also pp. 220-2.

 [28] _Ibid._, 1820-21, pp. 395-6.

 [29] _House Doc._, 14 Cong. 2 sess. II. No. 77.

 [30] _Annals of Cong._, 15 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 71, 73-78,
      94-109. The motion was opposed largely by Southern members,
      and passed by a vote of 17 to 16.

 [31] One was reported, May 9, 1820, by Mercer's committee, and
      passed May 12: _House Journal_, 16 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 497, 518,
      520, 526; _Annals of Cong._, 16 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 697-9. A
      similar resolution passed the House next session, and a
      committee reported in favor of the Right of Search: _Ibid._,
      16 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 1064-71. Cf. _Ibid._, pp. 476, 743, 865,
      1469.

 [32] _British and Foreign State Papers_, 1820-21, pp. 397-400.

 [33] _British and Foreign State Papers_, 1822-3, pp. 94-110.

 [34] _House Reports_, 17 Cong. 1 sess. II. No. 92.

 [35] _House Journal_, 17 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 212, 280; _Annals
      of Cong._, 17 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 922, 1147-1155.

 [36] _British and Foreign State Papers_, 1823-4, pp. 409-21;
      1824-5, pp. 828-47; _Amer. State Papers, Foreign_, V. No. 371,
      pp. 333-7.

 [37] _Ibid._

 [38] _Ibid._, No. 374, p. 344 ff., No. 379, pp. 360-2.

 [39] _House Reports_, 18 Cong. 2 sess. I. No. 70; _Amer. State
      Papers, Foreign_, V. No. 379, pp. 364-5, No. 414, p. 783, etc.
      Among the nations invited by the United States to co-operate
      in suppressing the trade was the United States of Colombia.
      Mr. Anderson, our minister, expressed "the certain belief that
      the Republic of Colombia will not permit herself to be behind
      any Government in the civilized world in the adoption of
      energetic measures for the suppression of this disgraceful
      traffic": _Ibid._, No. 407, p. 729. The little republic
      replied courteously; and, as a _projet_ for a treaty, Mr.
      Anderson offered the proposed English treaty of 1824,
      including the Senate amendments. Nevertheless, the treaty thus
      agreed to was summarily rejected by the Senate, March 9, 1825:
      _Ibid._, p. 735. Another result of this general invitation of
      the United States was a proposal by Colombia that the
      slave-trade and the status of Hayti be among the subjects for
      discussion at the Panama Congress. As a result of this, a
      Senate committee recommended that the United States take no
      part in the Congress. This report was finally disagreed to by
      a vote of 19 to 24: _Ibid._, No. 423, pp. 837, 860, 876, 882.

 [40] _British and Foreign State Papers_, 1823-4, and 1826-7.
      Brazil abolished the trade in 1830.

 [41] This treaty was further defined in 1833: _Ibid._, 1830-1,
      p. 641 ff.; 1832-3, p. 286 ff.

 [42] _Ibid._, 1833-4, pp. 218 ff., 1059 ff.

 [43] _Ibid._, 1837-8, p. 268 ff.

 [44] _Ibid._, 1838-9, p. 792 ff.

 [45] Viz., Feb. 28, 1825; April 7, 1830; Feb. 16, 1831; March
      3, 1831. The last resolution passed the House: _House
      Journal_, 21 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 426-8.

 [46] Cf. _House Doc._, 26 Cong. 2 sess. V. No. 115, pp. 35-6,
      etc.; _House Reports_, 27 Cong. 3 sess. III. No. 283, pp.
      730-55, etc.

 [47] These were the celebrated cases of the "Encomium,"
      "Enterprize," and "Comet." Cf. _Senate Doc._, 24 Cong. 2 sess.
      II. No. 174; 25 Cong. 3 sess. III. No. 216. Cf. also case of
      the "Creole": _Ibid._, 27 Cong. 2 sess. II.-III. Nos. 51, 137.

 [48] _Ibid._, 26 Cong. 2 sess. IV. No. 179; _Senate Exec.
      Doc._, 31 Cong. 2 sess. III. No. 29; 32 Cong. 2 sess. III. No.
      19; _Senate Reports_, 31 Cong. 2 sess. No. 301; 32 Cong. 1
      sess. I. No. 158; 35 Cong. 1 sess. I. No. 36; _House Doc._, 26
      Cong. 1 sess. IV. No. 185; 27 Cong. 3 sess. V. No. 191; 28
      Cong. 1 sess. IV. No. 83; _House Exec. Doc._, 32 Cong. 2 sess.
      III. No. 20; _House Reports_, 26 Cong. 2 sess. No. 51; 28
      Cong. 1 sess. II. No. 426; 29 Cong. 1 sess. IV. No. 753; also
      Decisions of the U.S. Supreme Court, _15 Peters_, 518. Cf.
      Drake, _Revelations of a Slave Smuggler_, p. 98.

 [49] _British and Foreign State Papers_, 1834-5, p. 136.

 [50] _Ibid._, pp. 135-47. Great Britain made treaties
      meanwhile with Hayti, Uruguay, Venezuela, Bolivia, Argentine
      Confederation, Mexico, Texas, etc. Portugal prohibited the
      slave-trade in 1836, except between her African colonies. Cf.
      _Ibid._, from 1838 to 1841.

 [51] These estimates are from the following sources: _Ibid._,
      1822-3, pp. 94-110; _Parliamentary Papers_, 1823, XVIII.,
      _Slave Trade_, Further Papers, A., pp. 10-11; 1838-9, XLIX.,
      _Slave Trade_, Class A, Further Series, pp. 115, 119, 121;
      _House Doc._, 19 Cong. 1 sess. I. No. 1, p. 93; 20 Cong. 1
      sess. III. No. 99; 26 Cong. 1 sess. VI. No. 211; _House Exec.
      Doc._, 31 Cong. 2 sess. I. No. 1, p. 193; _House Reports_, 21
      Cong. 1 sess. III. No. 348; _Senate Doc._, 28 Cong. 1 sess.
      IV. No. 217; 31 Cong. 1 sess. XIV. No. 66; 31 Cong. 2 sess.
      II. No. 6; _Amer. State Papers, Naval_, I. No. 249; Buxton,
      _The African Slave Trade and its Remedy_, pp. 44-59; Friends'
      _Facts and Observations on the Slave Trade_ (ed. 1841);
      Friends' _Exposition of the Slave Trade, 1840-50_; _Annual
      Reports of the American and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society_.

      The annexed table gives the dates of the abolition of the
      slave-trade by the various nations:--

    -------+-------------------+---------------------------+--------------
           |                   |                           |Arrangements
           |                   | Right of Search Treaty    |  for Joint
    Date.  |Slave-trade        |   with Great Britain,     |  Cruising
           |  Abolished by     |   made by                 |  with Great
           |                   |                           |  Britain,
           |                   |                           |  made by
    -------+-------------------+---------------------------+--------------
    1802   | Denmark.          |                           |
    1807   | Great Britain;    |                           |
           |   United States.  |                           |
    1813   | Sweden.           |                           |
    1814   | Netherlands.      |                           |
    1815   | Portugal (north   |                           |
           |   of the equator).|                           |
    1817   | Spain (north of   | Portugal; Spain.          |
           |   the equator).   |                           |
    1818   | France.           | Netherlands.              |
    1820   | Spain.            |                           |
    1824   |                   | Sweden.                   |
    1829   | Brazil (?).       |                           |
    1830   | Portugal.         |                           |
    1831-33|                   | France.                   |
    1833-39|                   | Denmark, Hanse Towns, etc.|
    1841   |                   | Quintuple Treaty (Austria,|
    1842   |                   |   Russia, Prussia).       | United States.
    1844   |                   | Texas.                    |
    1845   |                   | Belgium.                  | France.
    1862   |                   | United States.            |
    -------+-------------------+---------------------------+--------------



 [52] Cf. _British and Foreign State Papers_, from 1836 to
      1842.

 [53] _Ibid._, 1839-40, p. 940.

 [54] _House Doc._, 27 Cong. 1 sess. No. 34, pp. 5-6.

 [55] _Senate Doc._, 29 Cong. 1 sess. VIII. No. 377, p. 56.

 [56] _Ibid._, p. 72.

 [57] _Ibid._, pp. 133-40, etc.

 [58] _British and Foreign State Papers_, 1841-2, p. 269 ff.

 [59] See below, Appendix B.

 [60] _Senate Doc._, 29 Cong. 1 sess. VIII. No. 377, p. 201.

 [61] _Senate Exec. Journal_, VI. 123.

 [62] _U.S. Treaties and Conventions_ (ed. 1889), pp. 436-7.
      For the debates in the Senate, see _Congressional Globe_, 27
      Cong. 3 sess. Appendix. Cass resigned on account of the
      acceptance of this treaty without a distinct denial of the
      Right of Search, claiming that this compromised his position
      in France. Cf. _Senate Doc._, 27 Cong. 3 sess. II., IV. Nos.
      52, 223; 29 Cong. 1 sess. VIII. No. 377.

 [63] Cf. below, Chapter X.

 [64] _Senate Exec. Doc._, 28 Cong. 2 sess. IX. No. 150, p. 72.

 [65] _Ibid._, p. 77.

 [66] _House Doc._, 27 Cong. 3 sess. V. No. 192, p. 4. Cf.
      _British and Foreign State Papers_, 1842-3, p. 708 ff.

 [67] _House Journal_, 27 Cong. 3 sess. pp. 431, 485-8. Cf.
      _House Doc._, 27 Cong. 3 sess. V. No. 192.

 [68] Cf. below, Chapter X.

 [69] With a fleet of 26 vessels, reduced to 12 in 1849:
      _British and Foreign State Papers_, 1844-5, p. 4 ff.; 1849-50,
      p. 480.

 [70] _Ibid._, 1850-1, p. 953.

 [71] Portugal renewed her Right of Search treaty in 1842:
      _Ibid._, 1841-2, p. 527 ff.; 1842-3, p. 450.

 [72] _Ibid._, 1843-4, p. 316.

 [73] _Ibid._, 1844-5, p. 592. There already existed some such
      privileges between England and Texas.

 [74] _Ibid._, 1847-8, p. 397 ff.

 [75] _Ibid._, 1858-9, pp. 1121, 1129.

 [76] _British and Foreign State Papers_, 1859-60, pp. 902-3.

 [77] _House Exec. Doc._, 36 Cong. 2 sess. IV. No. 7.

 [78] _Ibid._

 [79] _Senate Exec. Doc._, 37 Cong. 2 sess. V. No. 57.

 [80] _Senate Exec. Journal_, XII. 230-1, 240, 254, 256, 391,
      400, 403; _Diplomatic Correspondence_, 1862, pp. 141, 158;
      _U.S. Treaties and Conventions_ (ed. 1889), pp. 454-9.

 [81] _Diplomatic Correspondence_, 1862, pp. 64-5. This treaty
      was revised in 1863. The mixed court in the West Indies had,
      by February, 1864, liberated 95,206 Africans: _Senate Exec.
      Doc._, 38 Cong. 1 sess. No. 56, p. 24.

                    *       *       *       *       *




_Chapter X_

THE RISE OF THE COTTON KINGDOM. 1820-1850.

  74. The Economic Revolution.
  75. The Attitude of the South.
  76. The Attitude of the North and Congress.
  77. Imperfect Application of the Laws.
  78. Responsibility of the Government.
  79. Activity of the Slave-Trade.


74. ~The Economic Revolution.~ The history of slavery and the
slave-trade after 1820 must be read in the light of the industrial
revolution through which the civilized world passed in the first half of
the nineteenth century. Between the years 1775 and 1825 occurred
economic events and changes of the highest importance and widest
influence. Though all branches of industry felt the impulse of this new
industrial life, yet, "if we consider single industries, cotton
manufacture has, during the nineteenth century, made the most
magnificent and gigantic advances."[1] This fact is easily explained by
the remarkable series of inventions that revolutionized this industry
between 1738 and 1830, including Arkwright's, Watt's, Compton's, and
Cartwright's epoch-making contrivances.[2] The effect which these
inventions had on the manufacture of cotton goods is best illustrated
by the fact that in England, the chief cotton market of the world, the
consumption of raw cotton rose steadily from 13,000 bales in 1781, to
572,000 in 1820, to 871,000 in 1830, and to 3,366,000 in 1860.[3] Very
early, therefore, came the query whence the supply of raw cotton was to
come. Tentative experiments on the rich, broad fields of the Southern
United States, together with the indispensable invention of Whitney's
cotton-gin, soon answered this question: a new economic future was
opened up to this land, and immediately the whole South began to extend
its cotton culture, and more and more to throw its whole energy into
this one staple.

Here it was that the fatal mistake of compromising with slavery in the
beginning, and of the policy of _laissez-faire_ pursued thereafter,
became painfully manifest; for, instead now of a healthy, normal,
economic development along proper industrial lines, we have the abnormal
and fatal rise of a slave-labor large farming system, which, before it
was realized, had so intertwined itself with and braced itself upon the
economic forces of an industrial age, that a vast and terrible civil war
was necessary to displace it. The tendencies to a patriarchal serfdom,
recognizable in the age of Washington and Jefferson, began slowly but
surely to disappear; and in the second quarter of the century Southern
slavery was irresistibly changing from a family institution to an
industrial system.

The development of Southern slavery has heretofore been viewed so
exclusively from the ethical and social standpoint that we are apt to
forget its close and indissoluble connection with the world's cotton
market. Beginning with 1820, a little after the close of the Napoleonic
wars, when the industry of cotton manufacture had begun its modern
development and the South had definitely assumed her position as chief
producer of raw cotton, we find the average price of cotton per pound,
8Â½_d._ From this time until 1845 the price steadily fell, until in the
latter year it reached 4_d._; the only exception to this fall was in the
years 1832-1839, when, among other things, a strong increase in the
English demand, together with an attempt of the young slave power to
"corner" the market, sent the price up as high as 11_d._ The demand for
cotton goods soon outran a crop which McCullough had pronounced
"prodigious," and after 1845 the price started on a steady rise, which,
except for the checks suffered during the continental revolutions and
the Crimean War, continued until 1860.[4] The steady increase in the
production of cotton explains the fall in price down to 1845. In 1822
the crop was a half-million bales; in 1831, a million; in 1838, a
million and a half; and in 1840-1843, two million. By this time the
world's consumption of cotton goods began to increase so rapidly that,
in spite of the increase in Southern crops, the price kept rising. Three
million bales were gathered in 1852, three and a half million in 1856,
and the remarkable crop of five million bales in 1860.[5]

Here we have data to explain largely the economic development of the
South. By 1822 the large-plantation slave system had gained footing; in
1838-1839 it was able to show its power in the cotton "corner;" by the
end of the next decade it had not only gained a solid economic
foundation, but it had built a closed oligarchy with a political policy.
The changes in price during the next few years drove out of competition
many survivors of the small-farming free-labor system, and put the slave
_rÃ©gime_ in position to dictate the policy of the nation. The zenith of
the system and the first inevitable signs of decay came in the years
1850-1860, when the rising price of cotton threw the whole economic
energy of the South into its cultivation, leading to a terrible
consumption of soil and slaves, to a great increase in the size of
plantations, and to increasing power and effrontery on the part of the
slave barons. Finally, when a rising moral crusade conjoined with
threatened economic disaster, the oligarchy, encouraged by the state of
the cotton market, risked all on a political _coup-d'Ã©tat_, which failed
in the war of 1861-1865.[6]


75. ~The Attitude of the South.~ The attitude of the South toward the
slave-trade changed _pari passu_ with this development of the cotton
trade. From 1808 to 1820 the South half wished to get rid of a
troublesome and abnormal institution, and yet saw no way to do so. The
fear of insurrection and of the further spread of the disagreeable
system led her to consent to the partial prohibition of the trade by
severe national enactments. Nevertheless, she had in the matter no
settled policy: she refused to support vigorously the execution of the
laws she had helped to make, and at the same time she acknowledged the
theoretical necessity of these laws. After 1820, however, there came a
gradual change. The South found herself supplied with a body of slave
laborers, whose number had been augmented by large illicit importations,
with an abundance of rich land, and with all other natural facilities
for raising a crop which was in large demand and peculiarly adapted to
slave labor. The increasing crop caused a new demand for slaves, and an
interstate slave-traffic arose between the Border and the Gulf States,
which turned the former into slave-breeding districts, and bound them to
the slave States by ties of strong economic interest.

As the cotton crop continued to increase, this source of supply became
inadequate, especially as the theory of land and slave consumption broke
down former ethical and prudential bounds. It was, for example, found
cheaper to work a slave to death in a few years, and buy a new one, than
to care for him in sickness and old age; so, too, it was easier to
despoil rich, new land in a few years of intensive culture, and move on
to the Southwest, than to fertilize and conserve the soil.[7]
Consequently, there early came a demand for land and slaves greater than
the country could supply. The demand for land showed itself in the
annexation of Texas, the conquest of Mexico, and the movement toward the
acquisition of Cuba. The demand for slaves was manifested in the illicit
traffic that noticeably increased about 1835, and reached large
proportions by 1860. It was also seen in a disposition to attack the
government for stigmatizing the trade as criminal,[8] then in a
disinclination to take any measures which would have rendered our
repressive laws effective; and finally in such articulate declarations
by prominent men as this: "Experience having settled the point, that
this Trade _cannot be abolished by the use of force_, and that
blockading squadrons serve only to make it more profitable and more
cruel, I am surprised that the attempt is persisted in, unless as it
serves as a cloak to some other purposes. It would be far better than it
now is, for the African, if the trade was free from all restrictions,
and left to the mitigation and decay which time and competition would
surely bring about."[9]


76. ~The Attitude of the North and Congress.~ With the North as yet
unawakened to the great changes taking place in the South, and with the
attitude of the South thus in process of development, little or no
constructive legislation could be expected on the subject of the
slave-trade. As the divergence in sentiment became more and more
pronounced, there were various attempts at legislation, all of which
proved abortive. The pro-slavery party attempted, as early as 1826, and
again in 1828, to abolish the African agency and leave the Africans
practically at the mercy of the States;[10] one or two attempts were
made to relax the few provisions which restrained the coastwise
trade;[11] and, after the treaty of 1842, Benton proposed to stop
appropriations for the African squadron until England defined her
position on the Right of Search question.[12] The anti-slavery men
presented several bills to amend and strengthen previous laws;[13] they
sought, for instance, in vain to regulate the Texan trade, through which
numbers of slaves indirectly reached the United States.[14] Presidents
and consuls earnestly recommended legislation to restrict the clearances
of vessels bound on slave-trading voyages, and to hinder the facility
with which slavers obtained fraudulent papers.[15] Only one such bill
succeeded in passing the Senate, and that was dropped in the House.[16]

The only legislation of this period was confined to a few appropriation
bills. Only one of these acts, that of 1823, appropriating $50,000,[17]
was designed materially to aid in the suppression of the trade, all the
others relating to expenses incurred after violations. After 1823 the
appropriations dwindled, being made at intervals of one, two, and three
years, down to 1834, when the amount was $5,000. No further
appropriations were made until 1842, when a few thousands above an
unexpended surplus were appropriated. In 1843 $5,000 were given, and
finally, in 1846, $25,000 were secured; but this was the last sum
obtainable until 1856.[18] Nearly all of these meagre appropriations
went toward reimbursing Southern plantation owners for the care and
support of illegally imported Africans, and the rest to the maintenance
of the African agency. Suspiciously large sums were paid for the first
purpose, considering the fact that such Africans were always worked hard
by those to whom they were farmed out, and often "disappeared" while in
their hands. In the accounts we nevertheless find many items like that
of $20,286.98 for the maintenance of Negroes imported on the
"Ramirez;"[19] in 1827, $5,442.22 for the "bounty, subsistence,
clothing, medicine," etc., of fifteen Africans;[20] in 1835, $3,613 for
the support of thirty-eight slaves for two months (including a bill of
$1,038 for medical attendance).[21]

The African agency suffered many vicissitudes. The first agent, Bacon,
who set out early in 1820, was authorized by President Monroe "to form
an establishment on the island of Sherbro, or elsewhere on the coast of
Africa," and to build barracks for three hundred persons. He was,
however, warned "not to connect your agency with the views or plans of
the Colonization Society, with which, under the law, the Government of
the United States has no concern." Bacon soon died, and was followed
during the next four years by Winn and Ayres; they succeeded in
establishing a government agency on Cape Mesurado, in conjunction with
that of the Colonization Society. The agent of that Society, Jehudi
Ashmun, became after 1822, the virtual head of the colony; he fortified
and enlarged it, and laid the foundations of an independent community.
The succeeding government agents came to be merely official
representatives of the United States, and the distribution of free
rations for liberated Africans ceased in 1827.

Between 1819 and 1830 two hundred and fifty-two recaptured Africans were
sent to the agency, and $264,710 were expended. The property of the
government at the agency was valued at $18,895. From 1830 to 1840,
nearly $20,000 more were expended, chiefly for the agents' salaries.
About 1840 the appointment of an agent ceased, and the colony became
gradually self-supporting and independent. It was proclaimed as the
Republic of Liberia in 1847.[22]


77. ~Imperfect Application of the Laws.~ In reviewing efforts toward the
suppression of the slave-trade from 1820 to 1850, it must be remembered
that nearly every cabinet had a strong, if not a predominating, Southern
element, and that consequently the efforts of the executive were
powerfully influenced by the changing attitude of the South. Naturally,
under such circumstances, the government displayed little activity and
no enthusiasm in the work. In 1824 a single vessel of the Gulf squadron
was occasionally sent to the African coast to return by the route
usually followed by the slavers; no wonder that "none of these or any
other of our public ships have found vessels engaged in the slave trade
under the flag of the United States, ... although it is known that the
trade still exists to a most lamentable extent."[23] Indeed, all that an
American slaver need do was to run up a Spanish or a Portuguese flag, to
be absolutely secure from all attack or inquiry on the part of United
States vessels. Even this desultory method of suppression was not
regular: in 1826 "no vessel has been despatched to the coast of Africa
for several months,"[24] and from that time until 1839 this country
probably had no slave-trade police upon the seas, except in the Gulf of
Mexico. In 1839 increasing violations led to the sending of two
fast-sailing vessels to the African coast, and these were kept there
more or less regularly;[25] but even after the signing of the treaty of
1842 the Secretary of the Navy reports: "On the coast of Africa we have
_no_ squadron. The small appropriation of the present year was believed
to be scarcely sufficient."[26] Between 1843 and 1850 the coast squadron
varied from two to six vessels, with from thirty to ninety-eight
guns;[27] "but the force habitually and actively engaged in cruizing on
the ground frequented by slavers has probably been less by one-fourth,
if we consider the size of the ships employed and their withdrawal for
purposes of recreation and health, and the movement of the reliefs,
whose arrival does not correspond exactly with the departure of the
vessels whose term of service has expired."[28] The reports of the navy
show that in only four of the eight years mentioned was the fleet, at
the time of report, at the stipulated size of eighty guns; and at times
it was much below this, even as late as 1848, when only two vessels are
reported on duty along the African coast.[29] As the commanders
themselves acknowledged, the squadron was too small and the
cruising-ground too large to make joint cruising effective.[30]

The same story comes from the Brazil station: "Nothing effectual can be
done towards stopping the slave trade, as our squadron is at present
organized," wrote the consul at Rio Janeiro in 1847; "when it is
considered that the Brazil station extends from north of the equator to
Cape Horn on this continent, and includes a great part of Africa south
of the equator, on both sides of the Cape of Good Hope, it must be
admitted that one frigate and one brig is a very insufficient force to
protect American commerce, and repress the participation in the slave
trade by our own vessels."[31] In the Gulf of Mexico cruisers were
stationed most of the time, although even here there were at times
urgent representations that the scarcity or the absence of such vessels
gave the illicit trade great license.[32]

Owing to this general negligence of the government, and also to its
anxiety on the subject of the theoretic Right of Search, many officials
were kept in a state of chronic deception in regard to the trade. The
enthusiasm of commanders was dampened by the lack of latitude allowed
and by the repeated insistence in their orders on the non-existence of a
Right of Search.[33] When one commander, realizing that he could not
cover the trading-track with his fleet, requested English commanders to
detain suspicious American vessels until one of his vessels came up, the
government annulled the agreement as soon as it reached their ears,
rebuked him, and the matter was alluded to in Congress long after with
horror.[34] According to the orders of cruisers, only slavers with
slaves actually on board could be seized. Consequently, fully equipped
slavers would sail past the American fleet, deliberately make all
preparations for shipping a cargo, then, when the English were not near,
"sell" the ship to a Spaniard, hoist the Spanish flag, and again sail
gayly past the American fleet with a cargo of slaves. An English
commander reported: "The officers of the United States' navy are
extremely active and zealous in the cause, and no fault can be
attributed to them, but it is greatly to be lamented that this blemish
should in so great a degree nullify our endeavours."[35]


78. ~Responsibility of the Government.~ Not only did the government thus
negatively favor the slave-trade, but also many conscious, positive acts
must be attributed to a spirit hostile to the proper enforcement of the
slave-trade laws. In cases of doubt, when the law needed executive
interpretation, the decision was usually in favor of the looser
construction of the law; the trade from New Orleans to Mobile was, for
instance, declared not to be coastwise trade, and consequently, to the
joy of the Cuban smugglers, was left utterly free and unrestricted.[36]
After the conquest of Mexico, even vessels bound to California, by the
way of Cape Horn, were allowed to clear coastwise, thus giving our flag
to "the slave-pirates of the whole world."[37] Attorney-General Nelson
declared that the selling to a slave-trader of an American vessel, to be
delivered on the coast of Africa, was not aiding or abetting the
slave-trade.[38] So easy was it for slavers to sail that corruption
among officials was hinted at. "There is certainly a want of proper
vigilance at Havana," wrote Commander Perry in 1844, "and perhaps at the
ports of the United States;" and again, in the same year, "I cannot but
think that the custom-house authorities in the United States are not
sufficiently rigid in looking after vessels of suspicious
character."[39]

In the courts it was still next to impossible to secure the punishment
of the most notorious slave-trader. In 1847 a consul writes: "The slave
power in this city [i.e., Rio Janeiro] is extremely great, and a consul
doing his duty needs to be supported kindly and effectually at home. In
the case of the 'Fame,' where the vessel was diverted from the business
intended by her owners and employed in the slave trade--both of which
offences are punishable with death, if I rightly read the laws--I sent
home the two mates charged with these offences, for trial, the first
mate to Norfolk, the second mate to Philadelphia. What was done with the
first mate I know not. In the case of the man sent to Philadelphia, Mr.
Commissioner Kane states that a clear prima facie case is made out, and
then holds him to bail in the sum of _one thousand dollars_, which would
be paid by any slave trader in Rio, on the _presentation of a draft_. In
all this there is little encouragement for exertion."[40] Again, the
"Perry" in 1850 captured a slaver which was about to ship 1,800 slaves.
The captain admitted his guilt, and was condemned in the United States
District Court at New York. Nevertheless, he was admitted to bail of
$5,000; this being afterward reduced to $3,000, he forfeited it and
escaped. The mate was sentenced to two years in the penitentiary.[41]
Also several slavers sent home to the United States by the British, with
clear evidence of guilt, escaped condemnation through
technicalities.[42]


79. ~Activity of the Slave-Trade, 1820-1850.~ The enhanced price of
slaves throughout the American slave market, brought about by the new
industrial development and the laws against the slave-trade, was the
irresistible temptation that drew American capital and enterprise into
that traffic. In the United States, in spite of the large interstate
traffic, the average price of slaves rose from about $325 in 1840, to
$360 in 1850, and to $500 in 1860.[43] Brazil and Cuba offered similar
inducements to smugglers, and the American flag was ready to protect
such pirates. As a result, the American slave-trade finally came to be
carried on principally by United States capital, in United States ships,
officered by United States citizens, and under the United States flag.

Executive reports repeatedly acknowledged this fact. In 1839 "a careful
revision of these laws" is recommended by the President, in order that
"the integrity and honor of our flag may be carefully preserved."[44] In
June, 1841, the President declares: "There is reason to believe that the
traffic is on the increase," and advocates "vigorous efforts."[45] His
message in December of the same year acknowledges: "That the American
flag is grossly abused by the abandoned and profligate of other nations
is but too probable."[46] The special message of 1845 explains at length
that "it would seem" that a regular policy of evading the laws is
carried on: American vessels with the knowledge of the owners are
chartered by notorious slave dealers in Brazil, aided by English
capitalists, with this intent.[47] The message of 1849 "earnestly"
invites the attention of Congress "to an amendment of our existing laws
relating to the African slave-trade, with a view to the effectual
suppression of that barbarous traffic. It is not to be denied,"
continues the message, "that this trade is still, in part, carried on by
means of vessels built in the United States, and owned or navigated by
some of our citizens."[48] Governor Buchanan of Liberia reported in
1839: "The chief obstacle to the success of the very active measures
pursued by the British government for the suppression of the slave-trade
on the coast, is the _American flag_. Never was the proud banner of
freedom so extensively used by those pirates upon liberty and humanity,
as at this season."[49] One well-known American slaver was boarded
fifteen times and twice taken into port, but always escaped by means of
her papers.[50] Even American officers report that the English are doing
all they can, but that the American flag protects the trade.[51] The
evidence which literally poured in from our consuls and ministers at
Brazil adds to the story of the guilt of the United States.[52] It was
proven that the participation of United States citizens in the trade was
large and systematic. One of the most notorious slave merchants of
Brazil said: "I am worried by the Americans, who insist upon my hiring
their vessels for slave-trade."[53] Minister Proffit stated, in 1844,
that the "slave-trade is almost entirely carried on under our flag, in
American-built vessels."[54] So, too, in Cuba: the British commissioners
affirm that American citizens were openly engaged in the traffic;
vessels arrived undisguised at Havana from the United States, and
cleared for Africa as slavers after an alleged sale.[55] The American
consul, Trist, was proven to have consciously or unconsciously aided
this trade by the issuance of blank clearance papers.[56]

The presence of American capital in these enterprises, and the
connivance of the authorities, were proven in many cases and known in
scores. In 1837 the English government informed the United States that
from the papers of a captured slaver it appeared that the notorious
slave-trading firm, Blanco and Carballo of Havana, who owned the vessel,
had correspondents in the United States: "at Baltimore, Messrs. Peter
Harmony and Co., in New York, Robert Barry, Esq."[57] The slaver
"Martha" of New York, captured by the "Perry," contained among her
papers curious revelations of the guilt of persons in America who were
little suspected.[58] The slaver "Prova," which was allowed to lie in
the harbor of Charleston, South Carolina, and refit, was afterwards
captured with two hundred and twenty-five slaves on board.[59] The real
reason that prevented many belligerent Congressmen from pressing certain
search claims against England lay in the fact that the unjustifiable
detentions had unfortunately revealed so much American guilt that it was
deemed wiser to let the matter end in talk. For instance, in 1850
Congress demanded information as to illegal searches, and President
Fillmore's report showed the uncomfortable fact that, of the ten
American ships wrongly detained by English men-of-war, nine were proven
red-handed slavers.[60]

The consul at Havana reported, in 1836, that whole cargoes of slaves
fresh from Africa were being daily shipped to Texas in American vessels,
that 1,000 had been sent within a few months, that the rate was
increasing, and that many of these slaves "can scarcely fail to find
their way into the United States." Moreover, the consul acknowledged
that ships frequently cleared for the United States in ballast, taking
on a cargo at some secret point.[61] When with these facts we consider
the law facilitating "recovery" of slaves from Texas,[62] the repeated
refusals to regulate the Texan trade, and the shelving of a proposed
congressional investigation into these matters,[63] conjecture becomes a
practical certainty. It was estimated in 1838 that 15,000 Africans were
annually taken to Texas, and "there are even grounds for suspicion that
there are other places ... where slaves are introduced."[64] Between
1847 and 1853 the slave smuggler Drake had a slave depot in the Gulf,
where sometimes as many as 1,600 Negroes were on hand, and the owners
were continually importing and shipping. "The joint-stock company,"
writes this smuggler, "was a very extensive one, and connected with
leading American and Spanish mercantile houses. Our island[65] was
visited almost weekly, by agents from Cuba, New York, Baltimore,
Philadelphia, Boston, and New Orleans.... The seasoned and instructed
slaves were taken to Texas, or Florida, overland, and to Cuba, in
sailing-boats. As no squad contained more than half a dozen, no
difficulty was found in posting them to the United States, without
discovery, and generally without suspicion.... The Bay Island plantation
sent ventures weekly to the Florida Keys. Slaves were taken into the
great American swamps, and there kept till wanted for the market.
Hundreds were sold as captured runaways from the Florida wilderness. We
had agents in every slave State; and our coasters were built in Maine,
and came out with lumber. I could tell curious stories ... of this
business of smuggling Bozal negroes into the United States. It is
growing more profitable every year, and if you should hang all the
Yankee merchants engaged in it, hundreds would fill their places."[66]
Inherent probability and concurrent testimony confirm the substantial
truth of such confessions. For instance, one traveller discovers on a
Southern plantation Negroes who can speak no English.[67] The careful
reports of the Quakers "apprehend that many [slaves] are also introduced
into the United States."[68] Governor Mathew of the Bahama Islands
reports that "in more than one instance, Bahama vessels with coloured
crews have been purposely wrecked on the coast of Florida, and the crews
forcibly sold." This was brought to the notice of the United States
authorities, but the district attorney of Florida could furnish no
information.[69]

Such was the state of the slave-trade in 1850, on the threshold of the
critical decade which by a herculean effort was destined finally to
suppress it.


FOOTNOTES:

  [1] Beer, _Geschichte des Welthandels im 19^{ten}
      Jahrhundert_, II. 67.

  [2] A list of these inventions most graphically illustrates
      this advance:--

        1738,    John Jay, fly-shuttle.
                 John Wyatt, spinning by rollers.
        1748,    Lewis Paul, carding-machine.
        1760,    Robert Kay, drop-box.
        1769,    Richard Arkwright, water-frame and throstle.
                 James Watt, steam-engine.
        1772,    James Lees, improvements on carding-machine.
        1775,    Richard Arkwright, series of combinations.
        1779,    Samuel Compton, mule.
        1785,    Edmund Cartwright, power-loom.
        1803-4,  Radcliffe and Johnson, dressing-machine.
        1817,    Roberts, fly-frame.
        1818,    William Eaton, self-acting frame.
        1825-30, Roberts, improvements on mule.

      Cf. Baines, _History of the Cotton Manufacture_, pp. 116-231;
      _EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica_, 9th ed., article "Cotton."

  [3] Baines, _History of the Cotton Manufacture_, p. 215. A
      bale weighed from 375 lbs. to 400 lbs.

  [4] The prices cited are from Newmarch and Tooke, and refer to
      the London market. The average price in 1855-60 was about
      7_d._

  [5] From United States census reports.

  [6] Cf. United States census reports; and Olmsted, _The Cotton
      Kingdom_.

  [7] Cf. United States census reports; and Olmsted, _The Cotton
      Kingdom_.

  [8] As early as 1836 Calhoun declared that he should ever
      regret that the term "piracy" had been applied to the
      slave-trade in our laws: Benton, _Abridgment of Debates_, XII.
      718.

  [9] Governor J.H. Hammond of South Carolina, in _Letters to
      Clarkson_, No. 1, p. 2.

 [10] In 1826 Forsyth of Georgia attempted to have a bill
      passed abolishing the African agency, and providing that the
      Africans imported be disposed of in some way that would entail
      no expense on the public treasury: _Home Journal_, 19 Cong. 1
      sess. p. 258. In 1828 a bill was reported to the House to
      abolish the agency and make the Colonization Society the
      agents, if they would agree to the terms. The bill was so
      amended as merely to appropriate money for suppressing the
      slave-trade: _Ibid._, 20 Cong. 1 sess., House Bill No. 190.

 [11] _Ibid._, pp. 121, 135; 20 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 58-9, 84,
      215.

 [12] _Congressional Globe_, 27 Cong. 3 sess. pp. 328, 331-6.

 [13] Cf. Mercer's bill, _House Journal_, 21 Cong. 1 sess. p.
      512; also Strange's two bills, _Senate Journal_, 25 Cong. 3
      sess. pp. 200, 313; 26 Cong. 1 sess., Senate Bill No. 123.

 [14] _Senate Journal_, 25 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 297-8, 300.

 [15] _Senate Doc_, 28 Cong. 1 sess. IV. No. 217, p. 19;
      _Senate Exec. Doc._, 31 Cong. 2 sess. II. No. 6, pp. 3, 10,
      etc.; 33 Cong. 1 sess. VIII. No. 47, pp. 5-6; 34 Cong. 1 sess.
      XV. No. 99, p. 80; _House Journal_, 26 Cong. 1 sess. pp.
      117-8; cf. _Ibid._, 20 Cong. 1 sess. p. 650, etc.; 21 Cong. 2
      sess. p. 194; 27 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 31, 184; _House Doc._, 29
      Cong. 1 sess. III. No. 43, p. 11; _House Exec. Doc._, 31 Cong.
      1 sess. III. pt. 1, No. 5, pp. 7-8.

 [16] _Senate Journal_, 26 Cong. 1 sess., Senate Bill No. 335;
      _House Journal_, 26 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 1138, 1228, 1257.

 [17] _Statutes at Large_, III. 764.

 [18] Cf. above, Chapter VIII. p. 125.

 [19] Cf. _Report of the Secretary of the Navy_, 1827.

 [20] _Ibid._

 [21] _House Reports_, 24 Cong. 1 sess. I. No. 223.

 [22] This account is taken exclusively from government
      documents: _Amer. State Papers, Naval_, III. Nos. 339, 340,
      357, 429 E; IV. Nos. 457 R (1 and 2), 486 H, I, p. 161 and 519
      R, 564 P, 585 P; _House Reports_, 19 Cong. 1 sess. I. No. 65;
      _House Doc._, 19 Cong. 2 sess. IV. No. 69; 21 Cong. 2 sess. I.
      No. 2, pp. 42-3, 211-8; 22 Cong. 1 sess. I. No. 2, pp. 45,
      272-4; 22 Cong. 2 sess. I. No. 2, pp. 48, 229; 23 Cong. 1
      sess. I. No. 1, pp. 238, 269; 23 Cong. 2 sess. I. No. 2, pp.
      315, 363; 24 Cong, 1 sess. I. No. 2, pp. 336, 378; 24 Cong. 2
      sess. I. No. 2, pp. 450, 506; 25 Cong. 2 sess. I. No. 3, pp.
      771, 850; 26 Cong. 1 sess. I. No. 2, pp. 534, 612; 26 Cong. 2
      sess. I. No. 2, pp. 405, 450. It is probable that the agent
      became eventually the United States consul and minister; I
      cannot however cite evidence for this supposition.

 [23] _Report of the Secretary of the Navy_, 1824.

 [24] _Ibid._, 1826.

 [25] _Ibid._, 1839.

 [26] _Ibid._, 1842.

 [27] _British and Foreign State Papers_, 1857-8, p. 1250.

 [28] Lord Napier to Secretary of State Cass, Dec. 24, 1857:
      _British and Foreign State Papers_, 1857-8, p. 1249.

 [29] _Parliamentary Papers_, 1847-8, Vol. LXIV. No. 133,
      _Papers Relative to the Suppression of the Slave Trade on the
      Coast of Africa_, p. 2.

 [30] Report of Perry: _Senate Doc._, 28 Cong. 2 sess. IX. No.
      150, p. 118.

 [31] Consul Park at Rio Janeiro to Secretary Buchanan, Aug.
      20, 1847: _House Exec. Doc._, 30 Cong. 2 sess. VII. No. 61, p.
      7.

 [32] Suppose "an American vessel employed to take in negroes
      at some point on this coast. There is no American man-of-war
      here to obtain intelligence. What risk does she run of being
      searched? But suppose that there is a man-of-war in port. What
      is to secure the master of the merchantman against her [the
      man-of-war's commander's knowing all about his [the
      merchant-man's] intention, or suspecting it in time to be upon
      him [the merchant-man] before he shall have run a league on
      his way to Texas?" Consul Trist to Commander Spence: _House
      Doc._, 27 Cong. 1 sess. No. 34, p. 41.]

 [33] A typical set of instructions was on the following plan:
      1. You are charged with the protection of legitimate commerce.
      2. While the United States wishes to suppress the slave-trade,
      she will not admit a Right of Search by foreign vessels. 3.
      You are to arrest slavers. 4. You are to allow in no case an
      exercise of the Right of Search or any great interruption of
      legitimate commerce.--To Commodore Perry, March 30, 1843:
      _House Exec. Doc._, 35 Cong. 2 sess. IX. No. 104.

 [34] _House Reports_, 27 Cong. 3 sess. III. No. 283, pp.
      765-8. Cf. Benton's speeches on the treaty of 1842.

 [35] Report of Hotham to Admiralty, April 7, 1847:
      _Parliamentary Papers_, 1847-8, Vol. LXIV. No. 133, _Papers
      Relative to the Suppression of the Slave Trade on the Coast of
      Africa_, p. 13.

 [36] _Opinions of Attorneys-General_, III. 512.

 [37] _Tenth Annual Report of the Amer. and Foreign Anti-Slav.
      Soc._, May 7, 1850, p. 149.

 [38] _Opinions of Attorneys-General_, IV. 245.

 [39] _Senate Doc._, 28 Cong. 2 sess. IX. No. 150, pp. 108,
      132.

 [40] _House Exec. Doc._, 30 Cong. 2 sess. VII. No. 61, p. 18.

 [41] Foote, _Africa and the American Flag_, pp. 286-90.

 [42] _British and Foreign State Papers_, 1839-40, pp. 913-4.

 [43] Cf. United States census reports; and Olmsted, _Cotton
      Kingdom_.

 [44] _House Journal_, 26 Cong. 1 sess. p. 118.

 [45] _Ibid._, 27 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 31, 184.

 [46] _Ibid._, 27 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 14, 15, 86, 113.

 [47] _Senate Journal_, 28 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 191, 227.

 [48] _House Exec. Doc._, 31 Cong. 1 sess. III. pt. I. No. 5,
      p. 7.

 [49] Foote, _Africa and the American Flag_, p. 152.

 [50] _Ibid._, pp. 152-3.

 [51] _Ibid._, p. 241.

 [52] Cf. e.g. _House Doc._, 28 Cong. 2 sess. IV. pt. I. No.
      148; 29 Cong. 1 sess. III. No. 43; _House Exec. Doc._, 30
      Cong. 2 sess. VII. No. 61; _Senate Exec. Doc._, 30 Cong. 1
      sess. IV. No. 28; 31 Cong. 2 sess. II. No. 6; 33 Cong. 1 sess.
      VIII. No. 47.

 [53] Foote, _Africa and the American Flag_, p. 218.

 [54] _Ibid._, p. 221.

 [55] Palmerston to Stevenson: _House Doc._, 26 Cong. 2 sess.
      V. No. 115, p. 5. In 1836 five such slavers were known to have
      cleared; in 1837, eleven; in 1838, nineteen; and in 1839,
      twenty-three: _Ibid._, pp. 220-1.

 [56] _Parliamentary Papers_, 1839, Vol. XLIX., _Slave Trade_,
      class A, Further Series, pp. 58-9; class B, Further Series, p.
      110; class D, Further Series, p. 25. Trist pleaded ignorance
      of the law: Trist to Forsyth, _House Doc._, 26 Cong. 2 sess.
      V. No. 115.

 [57] _House Doc._, 26 Cong. 2 sess. V. No. 115.

 [58] Foote, _Africa and the American Flag_, p. 290.

 [59] _House Doc._, 26 Cong. 2 sess. V. No. 115, pp. 121,
      163-6.

 [60] _Senate Exec. Doc._, 31 Cong. 1 sess. XIV No. 66.

 [61] Trist to Forsyth: _House Doc._, 26 Cong. 2 sess. V. No.
      115. "The business of supplying the United States with
      Africans from this island is one that must necessarily exist,"
      because "slaves are a hundred _per cent_, or more, higher in
      the United States than in Cuba," and this profit "is a
      temptation which it is not in human nature as modified by
      American institutions to withstand": _Ibid._

 [62] _Statutes at Large_, V. 674.

 [63] Cf. above, p. 157, note 1.

 [64] Buxton, _The African Slave Trade and its Remedy_, pp.
      44-5. Cf. _2d Report of the London African Soc._, p. 22.

 [65] I.e., Bay Island in the Gulf of Mexico, near the coast of
      Honduras.

 [66] _Revelations of a Slave Smuggler_, p. 98.

 [67] Mr. H. Moulton in _Slavery as it is_, p. 140; cited in
      _Facts and Observations on the Slave Trade_ (Friends' ed.
      1841), p. 8.

 [68] In a memorial to Congress, 1840: _House Doc._, 26 Cong. 1
      sess. VI. No. 211.

 [69] _British and Foreign State Papers_, 1845-6, pp. 883, 968,
      989-90. The governor wrote in reply: "The United States, if
      properly served by their law officers in the Floridas, will
      not experience any difficulty in obtaining the requisite
      knowledge of these illegal transactions, which, I have reason
      to believe, were the subject of common notoriety in the
      neighbourhood where they occurred, and of boast on the part of
      those concerned in them": _British and Foreign State Papers_,
      1845-6, p. 990.

                    *       *       *       *       *




_Chapter XI_

THE FINAL CRISIS. 1850-1870.

  80. The Movement against the Slave-Trade Laws.
  81. Commercial Conventions of 1855-56.
  82. Commercial Conventions of 1857-58.
  83. Commercial Convention of 1859.
  84. Public Opinion in the South.
  85. The Question in Congress.
  86. Southern Policy in 1860.
  87. Increase of the Slave-Trade from 1850 to 1860.
  88. Notorious Infractions of the Laws.
  89. Apathy of the Federal Government.
  90. Attitude of the Southern Confederacy.
  91. Attitude of the United States.


80. ~The Movement against the Slave-Trade Laws.~ It was not altogether a
mistaken judgment that led the constitutional fathers to consider the
slave-trade as the backbone of slavery. An economic system based on
slave labor will find, sooner or later, that the demand for the cheapest
slave labor cannot long be withstood. Once degrade the laborer so that
he cannot assert his own rights, and there is but one limit below which
his price cannot be reduced. That limit is not his physical well-being,
for it may be, and in the Gulf States it was, cheaper to work him
rapidly to death; the limit is simply the cost of procuring him and
keeping him alive a profitable length of time. Only the moral sense of a
community can keep helpless labor from sinking to this level; and when a
community has once been debauched by slavery, its moral sense offers
little resistance to economic demand. This was the case in the West
Indies and Brazil; and although better moral stamina held the crisis
back longer in the United States, yet even here the ethical standard of
the South was not able to maintain itself against the demands of the
cotton industry. When, after 1850, the price of slaves had risen to a
monopoly height, the leaders of the plantation system, brought to the
edge of bankruptcy by the crude and reckless farming necessary under a
slave _rÃ©gime_, and baffled, at least temporarily, in their quest of new
rich land to exploit, began instinctively to feel that the only
salvation of American slavery lay in the reopening of the African
slave-trade.

It took but a spark to put this instinctive feeling into words, and
words led to deeds. The movement first took definite form in the ever
radical State of South Carolina. In 1854 a grand jury in the
Williamsburg district declared, "as our unanimous opinion, that the
Federal law abolishing the African Slave Trade is a public grievance. We
hold this trade has been and would be, if re-established, a blessing to
the American people, and a benefit to the African himself."[1] This
attracted only local attention; but when, in 1856, the governor of the
State, in his annual message, calmly argued at length for a reopening of
the trade, and boldly declared that "if we cannot supply the demand for
slave labor, then we must expect to be supplied with a species of labor
we do not want,"[2] such words struck even Southern ears like "a thunder
clap in a calm day."[3] And yet it needed but a few years to show that
South Carolina had merely been the first to put into words the
inarticulate thought of a large minority, if not a majority, of the
inhabitants of the Gulf States.


81. ~Commercial Conventions of 1855-56.~ The growth of the movement is
best followed in the action of the Southern Commercial Convention, an
annual gathering which seems to have been fairly representative of a
considerable part of Southern opinion. In the convention that met at New
Orleans in 1855, McGimsey of Louisiana introduced a resolution
instructing the Southern Congressmen to secure the repeal of the
slave-trade laws. This resolution went to the Committee on Resolutions,
and was not reported.[4] In 1856, in the convention at Savannah, W.B.
Goulden of Georgia moved that the members of Congress be requested to
bestir themselves energetically to have repealed all laws which forbade
the slave-trade. By a vote of 67 to 18 the convention refused to debate
the motion, but appointed a committee to present at the next convention
the facts relating to a reopening of the trade.[5] In regard to this
action a pamphlet of the day said: "There were introduced into the
convention two leading measures, viz.: the laying of a State tariff on
northern goods, and the reopening of the slave-trade; the one to advance
our commercial interest, the other our agricultural interest, and which,
when taken together, as they were doubtless intended to be, and although
they have each been attacked by presses of doubtful service to the
South, are characterized in the private judgment of politicians as one
of the completest southern remedies ever submitted to popular action....
The proposition to revive, or more properly to reopen, the slave trade
is as yet but imperfectly understood, in its intentions and probable
results, by the people of the South, and but little appreciated by them.
It has been received in all parts of the country with an undefined sort
of repugnance, a sort of squeamishness, which is incident to all such
violations of moral prejudices, and invariably wears off on familiarity
with the subject. The South will commence by enduring, and end by
embracing the project."[6] The matter being now fully before the public
through these motions, Governor Adams's message, and newspaper and
pamphlet discussion, the radical party pushed the project with all
energy.


82. ~Commercial Conventions of 1857-58.~ The first piece of regular
business that came before the Commercial Convention at Knoxville,
Tennessee, August 10, 1857, was a proposal to recommend the abrogation
of the 8th Article of the Treaty of Washington, on the slave-trade. An
amendment offered by Sneed of Tennessee, declaring it inexpedient and
against settled policy to reopen the trade, was voted down, Alabama,
Arkansas, Florida, Louisiana, Mississippi, South Carolina, and Virginia
refusing to agree to it. The original motion then passed; and the
radicals, satisfied with their success in the first skirmish, again
secured the appointment of a committee to report at the next meeting on
the subject of reopening the slave-trade.[7] This next meeting assembled
May 10, 1858, in a Gulf State, Alabama, in the city of Montgomery.
Spratt of South Carolina, the slave-trade champion, presented an
elaborate majority report from the committee, and recommended the
following resolutions:--

    1. _Resolved_, That slavery is right, and that being right,
    there can be no wrong in the natural means to its formation.

    2. _Resolved_, That it is expedient and proper that the foreign
    slave trade should be re-opened, and that this Convention will
    lend its influence to any legitimate measure to that end.

    3. _Resolved_, That a committee, consisting of one from each
    slave State, be appointed to consider of the means, consistent
    with the duty and obligations of these States, for re-opening
    the foreign slave-trade, and that they report their plan to the
    next meeting of this Convention.

Yancey, from the same committee, presented a minority report, which,
though it demanded the repeal of the national prohibitory laws, did not
advocate the reopening of the trade by the States.

Much debate ensued. Pryor of Virginia declared the majority report "a
proposition to dissolve the Union." Yancey declared that "he was for
disunion now. [Applause.]" He defended the principle of the slave-trade,
and said: "If it is right to buy slaves in Virginia and carry them to
New Orleans, why is it not right to buy them in Cuba, Brazil, or Africa,
and carry them there?" The opposing speeches made little attempt to meet
this uncomfortable logic; but, nevertheless, opposition enough was
developed to lay the report on the table until the next convention, with
orders that it be printed, in the mean time, as a radical campaign
document. Finally the convention passed a resolution:--

    That it is inexpedient for any State, or its citizens, to
    attempt to re-open the African slave-trade while that State is
    one of the United States of America.[8]


83. ~Commercial Convention of 1859.~ The Convention of 1859 met at
Vicksburg, Mississippi, May 9-19, and the slave-trade party came ready
for a fray. On the second day Spratt called up his resolutions, and the
next day the Committee on Resolutions recommended that, _"in the opinion
of this Convention, all laws, State or Federal, prohibiting the African
slave trade, ought to be repealed."_ Two minority reports accompanied
this resolution: one proposed to postpone action, on account of the
futility of the attempt at that time; the other report recommended that,
since repeal of the national laws was improbable, nullification by the
States impracticable, and action by the Supreme Court unlikely,
therefore the States should bring in the Africans as apprentices, a
system the legality of which "is incontrovertible." "The only difficult
question," it was said, "is the future status of the apprentices after
the expiration of their term of servitude."[9] Debate on these
propositions began in the afternoon. A brilliant speech on the
resumption of the importation of slaves, says Foote of Mississippi, "was
listened to with breathless attention and applauded vociferously. Those
of us who rose in opposition were looked upon by the excited assemblage
present as _traitors_ to the best interests of the South, and only
worthy of expulsion from the body. The excitement at last grew so high
that personal violence was menaced, and some dozen of the more
conservative members of the convention withdrew from the hall in which
it was holding its sittings."[10] "It was clear," adds De Bow, "that the
people of Vicksburg looked upon it [i.e., the convention] with some
distrust."[11] When at last a ballot was taken, the first resolution
passed by a vote of 40 to 19.[12] Finally, the 8th Article of the Treaty
of Washington was again condemned; and it was also suggested, in the
newspaper which was the official organ of the meeting, that "the
Convention raise a fund to be dispensed in premiums for the best
sermons in favor of reopening the African Slave Trade."[13]


84. ~Public Opinion in the South.~ This record of the Commercial
Conventions probably gives a true reflection of the development of
extreme opinion on the question of reopening the slave-trade. First, it
is noticeable that on this point there was a distinct divergence of
opinion and interest between the Gulf and the Border States, and it was
this more than any moral repugnance that checked the radicals. The whole
movement represented the economic revolt of the slave-consuming
cotton-belt against their base of labor supply. This revolt was only
prevented from gaining its ultimate end by the fact that the Gulf States
could not get on without the active political co-operation of the Border
States. Thus, although such hot-heads as Spratt were not able, even as
late as 1859, to carry a substantial majority of the South with them in
an attempt to reopen the trade at all hazards, yet the agitation did
succeed in sweeping away nearly all theoretical opposition to the trade,
and left the majority of Southern people in an attitude which regarded
the reopening of the African slave-trade as merely a question of
expediency.

This growth of Southern opinion is clearly to be followed in the
newspapers and pamphlets of the day, in Congress, and in many
significant movements. The Charleston _Standard_ in a series of articles
strongly advocated the reopening of the trade; the Richmond _Examiner_,
though opposing the scheme as a Virginia paper should, was brought to
"acknowledge that the laws which condemn the Slave-trade imply an
aspersion upon the character of the South.[14] In March, 1859, the
_National Era_ said: "There can be no doubt that the idea of reviving
the African Slave Trade is gaining ground in the South. Some two months
ago we could quote strong articles from ultra Southern journals against
the traffic; but of late we have been sorry to observe in the same
journals an ominous silence upon the subject, while the advocates of
'free trade in negroes' are earnest and active."[15] The Savannah
_Republican_, which at first declared the movement to be of no serious
intent, conceded, in 1859, that it was gaining favor, and that
nine-tenths of the Democratic Congressional Convention favored it, and
that even those who did not advocate a revival demanded the abolition of
the laws.[16] A correspondent from South Carolina writes, December 18,
1859: "The nefarious project of opening it [i.e., the slave trade] has
been started here in that prurient temper of the times which manifests
itself in disunion schemes.... My State is strangely and terribly
infected with all this sort of thing.... One feeling that gives a
countenance to the opening of the slave trade is, that it will be a sort
of spite to the North and defiance of their opinions."[17] The New
Orleans _Delta_ declared that those who voted for the slave-trade in
Congress were men "whose names will be honored hereafter for the
unflinching manner in which they stood up for principle, for truth, and
consistency, as well as the vital interests of the South."[18]

85. ~The Question in Congress.~ Early in December, 1856, the subject
reached Congress; and although the agitation was then new, fifty-seven
Southern Congressmen refused to declare a re-opening of the slave-trade
"shocking to the moral sentiment of the enlightened portion of mankind,"
and eight refused to call the reopening even "unwise" and
"inexpedient."[19] Three years later, January 31, 1859, it was
impossible, in a House of one hundred and ninety-nine members, to get a
two-thirds vote in order even to consider Kilgore's resolutions, which
declared "that no legislation can be too thorough in its measures, nor
can any penalty known to the catalogue of modern punishment for crime be
too severe against a traffic so inhuman and unchristian."[20]

Congressmen and other prominent men hastened with the rising tide.[21]
Dowdell of Alabama declared the repressive acts "highly offensive;" J.B.
Clay of Kentucky was "opposed to all these laws;"[22] Seward of Georgia
declared them "wrong, and a violation of the Constitution;"[23]
Barksdale of Mississippi agreed with this sentiment; Crawford of Georgia
threatened a reopening of the trade; Miles of South Carolina was for
"sweeping away" all restrictions;[24] Keitt of South Carolina wished to
withdraw the African squadron, and to cease to brand slave-trading as
piracy;[25] Brown of Mississippi "would repeal the law instantly;"[26]
Alexander Stephens, in his farewell address to his constituents, said:
"Slave states cannot be made without Africans.... [My object is] to
bring clearly to your mind the great truth that without an increase of
African slaves from abroad, you may not expect or look for many more
slave States."[27] Jefferson Davis strongly denied "any coincidence of
opinion with those who prate of the inhumanity and sinfulness of the
trade. The interest of Mississippi," said he, "not of the African,
dictates my conclusion." He opposed the immediate reopening of the trade
in Mississippi for fear of a paralyzing influx of Negroes, but carefully
added: "This conclusion, in relation to Mississippi, is based upon my
view of her _present_ condition, _not_ upon any _general theory_. It is
not supposed to be applicable to Texas, to New Mexico, or to any _future
acquisitions_ to be made south of the Rio Grande."[28] John Forsyth, who
for seven years conducted the slave-trade diplomacy of the nation,
declared, about 1860: "But one stronghold of its [i.e., slavery's]
enemies remains to be carried, to _complete its triumph_ and assure its
welfare,--that is the existing prohibition of the African
Slave-trade."[29] Pollard, in his _Black Diamonds_, urged the
importation of Africans as "laborers." "This I grant you," said he,
"would be practically the re-opening of the African slave trade; but ...
you will find that it very often becomes necessary to evade the letter
of the law, in some of the greatest measures of social happiness and
patriotism."[30]


86. ~Southern Policy in 1860.~ The matter did not rest with mere words.
During the session of the Vicksburg Convention, an "African Labor Supply
Association" was formed, under the presidency of J.D.B. De Bow, editor
of _De Bow's Review_, and ex-superintendent of the seventh census. The
object of the association was "to promote the supply of African
labor."[31] In 1857 the committee of the South Carolina legislature to
whom the Governor's slave-trade message was referred made an elaborate
report, which declared in italics: _"The South at large does need a
re-opening of the African slave trade."_ Pettigrew, the only member who
disagreed to this report, failed of re-election. The report contained an
extensive argument to prove the kingship of cotton, the perfidy of
English philanthropy, and the lack of slaves in the South, which, it was
said, would show a deficit of six hundred thousand slaves by 1878.[32]
In Georgia, about this time, an attempt to expunge the slave-trade
prohibition in the State Constitution lacked but one vote of
passing.[33] From these slower and more legal movements came others
less justifiable. The long argument on the "apprentice" system finally
brought a request to the collector of the port at Charleston, South
Carolina, from E. Lafitte & Co., for a clearance to Africa for the
purpose of importing African "emigrants." The collector appealed to the
Secretary of the Treasury, Howell Cobb of Georgia, who flatly refused to
take the bait, and replied that if the "emigrants" were brought in as
slaves, it would be contrary to United States law; if as freemen, it
would be contrary to their own State law.[34] In Louisiana a still more
radical movement was attempted, and a bill passed the House of
Representatives authorizing a company to import two thousand five
hundred Africans, "indentured" for fifteen years "at least." The bill
lacked but two votes of passing the Senate.[35] It was said that the
_Georgian_, of Savannah, contained a notice of an agricultural society
which "unanimously resolved to offer a premium of $25 for the best
specimen of a live African imported into the United States within the
last twelve months."[36]

It would not be true to say that there was in the South in 1860
substantial unanimity on the subject of reopening the slave-trade;
nevertheless, there certainly was a large and influential minority,
including perhaps a majority of citizens of the Gulf States, who favored
the project, and, in defiance of law and morals, aided and abetted its
actual realization. Various movements, it must be remembered, gained
much of their strength from the fact that their success meant a partial
nullification of the slave-trade laws. The admission of Texas added
probably seventy-five thousand recently imported slaves to the Southern
stock; the movement against Cuba, which culminated in the "Ostend
Manifesto" of Buchanan, Mason, and SoulÃ©, had its chief impetus in the
thousands of slaves whom Americans had poured into the island. Finally,
the series of filibustering expeditions against Cuba, Mexico, and
Central America were but the wilder and more irresponsible attempts to
secure both slave territory and slaves.


87. ~Increase of the Slave-Trade from 1850 to 1860.~ The long and open
agitation for the reopening of the slave-trade, together with the fact
that the South had been more or less familiar with violations of the
laws since 1808, led to such a remarkable increase of illicit traffic
and actual importations in the decade 1850-1860, that the movement may
almost be termed a reopening of the slave-trade.

In the foreign slave-trade our own officers continue to report "how
shamefully our flag has been used;"[37] and British officers write "that
at least one half of the successful part of the slave trade is carried
on under the American flag," and this because "the number of American
cruisers on the station is so small, in proportion to the immense extent
of the slave-dealing coast."[38] The fitting out of slavers became a
flourishing business in the United States, and centred at New York City.
"Few of our readers," writes a periodical of the day, "are aware of the
extent to which this infernal traffic is carried on, by vessels clearing
from New York, and in close alliance with our legitimate trade; and that
down-town merchants of wealth and respectability are extensively engaged
in buying and selling African Negroes, and have been, with comparatively
little interruption, for an indefinite number of years."[39] Another
periodical says: "The number of persons engaged in the slave-trade, and
the amount of capital embarked in it, exceed our powers of calculation.
The city of New York has been until of late [1862] the principal port of
the world for this infamous commerce; although the cities of Portland
and Boston are only second to her in that distinction. Slave dealers
added largely to the wealth of our commercial metropolis; they
contributed liberally to the treasuries of political organizations, and
their bank accounts were largely depleted to carry elections in New
Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Connecticut."[40] During eighteen months of
the years 1859-1860 eighty-five slavers are reported to have been
fitted out in New York harbor,[41] and these alone transported from
30,000 to 60,000 slaves annually.[42] The United States deputy marshal
of that district declared in 1856 that the business of fitting out
slavers "was never prosecuted with greater energy than at present. The
occasional interposition of the legal authorities exercises no apparent
influence for its suppression. It is seldom that one or more vessels
cannot be designated at the wharves, respecting which there is evidence
that she is either in or has been concerned in the Traffic."[43] On the
coast of Africa "it is a well-known fact that most of the Slave ships
which visit the river are sent from New York and New Orleans."[44]

The absence of United States war-ships at the Brazilian station enabled
American smugglers to run in cargoes, in spite of the prohibitory law.
One cargo of five hundred slaves was landed in 1852, and the _Correio
Mercantil_ regrets "that it was the flag of the United States which
covered this act of piracy, sustained by citizens of that great
nation."[45] When the Brazil trade declined, the illicit Cuban trade
greatly increased, and the British consul reported: "Almost all the
slave expeditions for some time past have been fitted out in the United
States, chiefly at New York."[46]

88. ~Notorious Infractions of the Laws.~ This decade is especially
noteworthy for the great increase of illegal importations into the
South. These became bold, frequent, and notorious. Systematic
introduction on a considerable scale probably commenced in the forties,
although with great secrecy. "To have boldly ventured into New Orleans,
with negroes freshly imported from Africa, would not only have brought
down upon the head of the importer the vengeance of our very
philanthropic Uncle Sam, but also the anathemas of the whole sect of
philanthropists and negrophilists everywhere. To import them for years,
however, into quiet places, evading with impunity the penalty of the
law, and the ranting of the thin-skinned sympathizers with Africa, was
gradually to popularize the traffic by creating a demand for laborers,
and thus to pave the way for the _gradual revival of the slave trade_.
To this end, a few men, bold and energetic, determined, ten or twelve
years ago [1848 or 1850], to commence the business of importing negroes,
slowly at first, but surely; and for this purpose they selected a few
secluded places on the coast of Florida, Georgia and Texas, for the
purpose of concealing their stock until it could be sold out. Without
specifying other places, let me draw your attention to a deep and abrupt
pocket or indentation in the coast of Texas, about thirty miles from
Brazos Santiago. Into this pocket a slaver could run at any hour of the
night, because there was no hindrance at the entrance, and here she
could discharge her cargo of movables upon the projecting bluff, and
again proceed to sea inside of three hours. The live stock thus landed
could be marched a short distance across the main island, over a porous
soil which refuses to retain the recent foot-prints, until they were
again placed in boats, and were concealed upon some of the innumerable
little islands which thicken on the waters of the Laguna in the rear.
These islands, being covered with a thick growth of bushes and grass,
offer an inscrutable hiding place for the 'black diamonds.'"[47] These
methods became, however, toward 1860, too slow for the radicals, and the
trade grew more defiant and open. The yacht "Wanderer," arrested on
suspicion in New York and released, landed in Georgia six months later
four hundred and twenty slaves, who were never recovered.[48] The
Augusta _Despatch_ says: "Citizens of our city are probably interested
in the enterprise. It is hinted that this is the third cargo landed by
the same company, during the last six months."[49] Two parties of
Africans were brought into Mobile with impunity. One bark, strongly
suspected of having landed a cargo of slaves, was seized on the Florida
coast; another vessel was reported to be landing slaves near Mobile; a
letter from Jacksonville, Florida, stated that a bark had left there for
Africa to ship a cargo for Florida and Georgia.[50] Stephen A. Douglas
said "that there was not the shadow of doubt that the Slave-trade had
been carried on quite extensively for a long time back, and that there
had been more Slaves imported into the southern States, during the last
year, than had ever been imported before in any one year, even when the
Slave-trade was legal. It was his confident belief, that over fifteen
thousand Slaves had been brought into this country during the past year
[1859.] He had seen, with his own eyes, three hundred of those
recently-imported, miserable beings, in a Slave-pen in Vicksburg, Miss.,
and also large numbers at Memphis, Tenn."[51] It was currently reported
that depots for these slaves existed in over twenty large cities and
towns in the South, and an interested person boasted to a senator, about
1860, that "twelve vessels would discharge their living freight upon our
shores within ninety days from the 1st of June last," and that between
sixty and seventy cargoes had been successfully introduced in the last
eighteen months.[52] The New York _Tribune_ doubted the statement; but
John C. Underwood, formerly of Virginia, wrote to the paper saying that
he was satisfied that the correspondent was correct. "I have," he said,
"had ample evidences of the fact, that reopening the African Slave-trade
is a thing already accomplished, and the traffic is brisk, and rapidly
increasing. In fact, the most vital question of the day is not the
opening of this trade, but its suppression. The arrival of cargoes of
negroes, fresh from Africa, in our southern ports, is an event of
frequent occurrence."[53]

Negroes, newly landed, were openly advertised for sale in the public
press, and bids for additional importations made. In reply to one of
these, the Mobile _Mercury_ facetiously remarks: "Some negroes who never
learned to talk English, went up the railroad the other day."[54]
Congressmen declared on the floor of the House: "The slave trade may
therefore be regarded as practically re-established;"[55] and petitions
like that from the American Missionary Society recited the fact that
"this piratical and illegal trade--this inhuman invasion of the rights
of men,--this outrage on civilization and Christianity--this violation
of the laws of God and man--is openly countenanced and encouraged by a
portion of the citizens of some of the States of this Union."[56]

From such evidence it seems clear that the slave-trade laws, in spite of
the efforts of the government, in spite even of much opposition to these
extra-legal methods in the South itself, were grossly violated, if not
nearly nullified, in the latter part of the decade 1850-1860.


89. ~Apathy of the Federal Government.~ During the decade there was some
attempt at reactionary legislation, chiefly directed at the Treaty of
Washington. June 13, 1854, Slidell, from the Committee on Foreign
Relations, made an elaborate report to the Senate, advocating the
abrogation of the 8th Article of that treaty, on the ground that it was
costly, fatal to the health of the sailors, and useless, as the trade
had actually increased under its operation.[57] Both this and a similar
attempt in the House failed,[58] as did also an attempt to substitute
life imprisonment for the death penalty.[59] Most of the actual
legislation naturally took the form of appropriations. In 1853 there was
an attempt to appropriate $20,000.[60] This failed, and the
appropriation of $8,000 in 1856 was the first for ten years.[61] The
following year brought a similar appropriation,[62] and in 1859[63] and
1860[64] $75,000 and $40,000 respectively were appropriated. Of
attempted legislation to strengthen the laws there was plenty: e.g.,
propositions to regulate the issue of sea-letters and the use of our
flag;[65] to prevent the "coolie" trade, or the bringing in of
"apprentices" or "African laborers;"[66] to stop the coastwise
trade;[67] to assent to a Right of Search;[68] and to amend the
Constitution by forever prohibiting the slave-trade.[69]

The efforts of the executive during this period were criminally lax and
negligent. "The General Government did not exert itself in good faith to
carry out either its treaty stipulations or the legislation of Congress
in regard to the matter. If a vessel was captured, her owners were
permitted to bond her, and thus continue her in the trade; and if any
man was convicted of this form of piracy, the executive always
interposed between him and the penalty of his crime. The laws providing
for the seizure of vessels engaged in the traffic were so constructed as
to render the duty unremunerative; and marshals now find their fees for
such services to be actually less than their necessary expenses. No one
who bears this fact in mind will be surprised at the great indifference
of these officers to the continuing of the slave-trade; in fact, he will
be ready to learn that the laws of Congress upon the subject had become
a dead letter, and that the suspicion was well grounded that certain
officers of the Federal Government had actually connived at their
violation."[70] From 1845 to 1854, in spite of the well-known activity
of the trade, but five cases obtained cognizance in the New York
district. Of these, Captains Mansfield and Driscoll forfeited their
bonds of $5,000 each, and escaped; in the case of the notorious Canot,
nothing had been done as late as 1856, although he was arrested in 1847;
Captain Jefferson turned State's evidence, and, in the case of Captain
Mathew, a _nolle prosequi_ was entered.[71] Between 1854 and 1856
thirty-two persons were indicted in New York, of whom only thirteen had
at the latter date been tried, and only one of these convicted.[72]
These dismissals were seldom on account of insufficient evidence. In the
notorious case of the "Wanderer," she was arrested on suspicion,
released, and soon after she landed a cargo of slaves in Georgia; some
who attempted to seize the Negroes were arrested for larceny, and in
spite of the efforts of Congress the captain was never punished. The
yacht was afterwards started on another voyage, and being brought back
to Boston was sold to her former owner for about one third her
value.[73] The bark "Emily" was seized on suspicion and released, and
finally caught red-handed on the coast of Africa; she was sent to New
York for trial, but "disappeared" under a certain slave captain,
Townsend, who had, previous to this, in the face of the most convincing
evidence, been acquitted at Key West.[74]

The squadron commanders of this time were by no means as efficient as
their predecessors, and spent much of their time, apparently, in
discussing the Right of Search. Instead of a number of small light
vessels, which by the reports of experts were repeatedly shown to be the
only efficient craft, the government, until 1859, persisted in sending
out three or four great frigates. Even these did not attend faithfully
to their duties. A letter from on board one of them shows that, out of a
fifteen months' alleged service, only twenty-two days were spent on the
usual cruising-ground for slavers, and thirteen of these at anchor;
eleven months were spent at Madeira and Cape Verde Islands, 300 miles
from the coast and 3,000 miles from the slave market.[75] British
commanders report the apathy of American officers and the extreme
caution of their instructions, which allowed many slavers to escape.[76]

The officials at Washington often remained in blissful, and perhaps
willing, ignorance of the state of the trade. While Americans were
smuggling slaves by the thousands into Brazil, and by the hundreds into
the United States, Secretary Graham was recommending the abrogation of
the 8th Article of the Treaty of Washington;[77] so, too, when the Cuban
slave-trade was reaching unprecedented activity, and while slavers were
being fitted out in every port on the Atlantic seaboard, Secretary
Kennedy naÃ¯vely reports, "The time has come, perhaps, when it may be
properly commended to the notice of Congress to inquire into the
necessity of further continuing the regular employment of a squadron on
this [i.e., the African] coast."[78] Again, in 1855, the government has
"advices that the slave trade south of the equator is entirely broken
up;"[79] in 1856, the reports are "favorable;"[80] in 1857 a British
commander writes: "No vessel has been seen here for one year, certainly;
I think for nearly three years there have been no American cruizers on
these waters, where a valuable and extensive American commerce is
carried on. I cannot, therefore, but think that this continued absence
of foreign cruizers looks as if they were intentionally withdrawn, and
as if the Government did not care to take measures to prevent the
American flag being used to cover Slave Trade transactions;"[81]
nevertheless, in this same year, according to Secretary Toucey, "the
force on the coast of Africa has fully accomplished its main
object."[82] Finally, in the same month in which the "Wanderer" and her
mates were openly landing cargoes in the South, President Buchanan, who
seems to have been utterly devoid of a sense of humor, was urging the
annexation of Cuba to the United States as the only method of
suppressing the slave-trade![83]

About 1859 the frequent and notorious violations of our laws aroused
even the Buchanan government; a larger appropriation was obtained, swift
light steamers were employed, and, though we may well doubt whether
after such a carnival illegal importations "entirely" ceased, as the
President informed Congress,[84] yet some sincere efforts at suppression
were certainly begun. From 1850 to 1859 we have few notices of captured
slavers, but in 1860 the increased appropriation of the thirty-fifth
Congress resulted in the capture of twelve vessels with 3,119
Africans.[85] The Act of June 16, 1860, enabled the President to
contract with the Colonization Society for the return of recaptured
Africans; and by a long-needed arrangement cruisers were to proceed
direct to Africa with such cargoes, instead of first landing them in
this country.[86]


90. ~Attitude of the Southern Confederacy.~ The attempt, initiated by
the constitutional fathers, to separate the problem of slavery from that
of the slave-trade had, after a trial of half a century, signally
failed, and for well-defined economic reasons. The nation had at last
come to the parting of the ways, one of which led to a free-labor
system, the other to a slave system fed by the slave-trade. Both
sections of the country naturally hesitated at the cross-roads: the
North clung to the delusion that a territorially limited system of
slavery, without a slave-trade, was still possible in the South; the
South hesitated to fight for her logical object--slavery and free trade
in Negroes--and, in her moral and economic dilemma, sought to make
autonomy and the Constitution her object. The real line of contention
was, however, fixed by years of development, and was unalterable by the
present whims or wishes of the contestants, no matter how important or
interesting these might be: the triumph of the North meant free labor;
the triumph of the South meant slavery and the slave-trade.

It is doubtful if many of the Southern leaders ever deceived themselves
by thinking that Southern slavery, as it then was, could long be
maintained without a general or a partial reopening of the slave-trade.
Many had openly declared this a few years before, and there was no
reason for a change of opinion. Nevertheless, at the outbreak of actual
war and secession, there were powerful and decisive reasons for
relegating the question temporarily to the rear. In the first place,
only by this means could the adherence of important Border States be
secured, without the aid of which secession was folly. Secondly, while
it did no harm to laud the independence of the South and the kingship of
cotton in "stump" speeches and conventions, yet, when it came to actual
hostilities, the South sorely needed the aid of Europe; and this a
nation fighting for slavery and the slave-trade stood poor chance of
getting. Consequently, after attacking the slave-trade laws for a
decade, and their execution for a quarter-century, we find the Southern
leaders inserting, in both the provisional and the permanent
Constitutions of the Confederate States, the following article:--

    The importation of negroes of the African race, from any foreign
    country other than the slaveholding States or Territories of the
    United States of America, is hereby forbidden; and Congress is
    required to pass such laws as shall effectually prevent the
    same.

    Congress shall also have power to prohibit the introduction of
    slaves from any State not a member of, or Territory not
    belonging to, this Confederacy.[87]

The attitude of the Confederate government toward this article is best
illustrated by its circular of instructions to its foreign ministers:--

    It has been suggested to this Government, from a source of
    unquestioned authenticity, that, after the recognition of our
    independence by the European Powers, an expectation is generally
    entertained by them that in our treaties of amity and commerce a
    clause will be introduced making stipulations against the
    African slave trade. It is even thought that neutral Powers may
    be inclined to insist upon the insertion of such a clause as a
    _sine qua non_.

    You are well aware how firmly fixed in our Constitution is the
    policy of this Confederacy against the opening of that trade,
    but we are informed that false and insidious suggestions have
    been made by the agents of the United States at European Courts
    of our intention to change our constitution as soon as peace is
    restored, and of authorizing the importation of slaves from
    Africa. If, therefore, you should find, in your intercourse with
    the Cabinet to which you are accredited, that any such
    impressions are entertained, you will use every proper effort to
    remove them, and if an attempt is made to introduce into any
    treaty which you may be charged with negotiating stipulations on
    the subject just mentioned, you will assume, in behalf of your
    Government, the position which, under the direction of the
    President, I now proceed to develop.

    The Constitution of the Confederate States is an agreement made
    between independent States. By its terms all the powers of
    Government are separated into classes as follows, viz.:--

    1st. Such powers as the States delegate to the General
    Government.

    2d. Such powers as the States agree to refrain from exercising,
    although they do not delegate them to the General Government.

    3d. Such powers as the States, without delegating them to the
    General Government, thought proper to exercise by direct
    agreement between themselves contained in the Constitution.

    4th. All remaining powers of sovereignty, which not being
    delegated to the Confederate States by the Constitution nor
    prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States
    respectively, or to the people thereof.... Especially in
    relation to the importation of African negroes was it deemed
    important by the States that no power to permit it should exist
    in the Confederate Government.... It will thus be seen that no
    power is delegated to the Confederate Government over this
    subject, but that it is included in the third class above
    referred to, of powers exercised directly by the States.... This
    Government unequivocally and absolutely denies its possession of
    any power whatever over the subject, and cannot entertain any
    proposition in relation to it.... The policy of the Confederacy
    is as fixed and immutable on this subject as the imperfection of
    human nature permits human resolve to be. No additional
    agreements, treaties, or stipulations can commit these States to
    the prohibition of the African slave trade with more binding
    efficacy than those they have themselves devised. A just and
    generous confidence in their good faith on this subject
    exhibited by friendly Powers will be far more efficacious than
    persistent efforts to induce this Government to assume the
    exercise of powers which it does not possess.... We trust,
    therefore, that no unnecessary discussions on this matter will
    be introduced into your negotiations. If, unfortunately, this
    reliance should prove ill-founded, you will decline continuing
    negotiations on your side, and transfer them to us at
    home....[88]

This attitude of the conservative leaders of the South, if it meant
anything, meant that individual State action could, when it pleased,
reopen the slave-trade. The radicals were, of course, not satisfied with
any veiling of the ulterior purpose of the new slave republic, and
attacked the constitutional provision violently. "If," said one, "the
clause be carried into the permanent government, our whole movement is
defeated. It will abolitionize the Border Slave States--it will brand
our institution. Slavery cannot share a government with Democracy,--it
cannot bear a brand upon it; thence another revolution ... having
achieved one revolution to escape democracy at the North, it must still
achieve another to escape it at the South. That it will ultimately
triumph none can doubt."[89]

91. ~Attitude of the United States.~ In the North, with all the
hesitation in many matters, there existed unanimity in regard to the
slave-trade; and the new Lincoln government ushered in the new policy of
uncompromising suppression by hanging the first American slave-trader
who ever suffered the extreme penalty of the law.[90] One of the
earliest acts of President Lincoln was a step which had been necessary
since 1808, but had never been taken, viz., the unification of the whole
work of suppression into the hands of one responsible department. By an
order, dated May 2, 1861, Caleb B. Smith, Secretary of the Interior, was
charged with the execution of the slave-trade laws,[91] and he
immediately began energetic work. Early in 1861, as soon as the
withdrawal of the Southern members untied the hands of Congress, two
appropriations of $900,000 each were made to suppress the slave trade,
the first appropriations commensurate with the vastness of the task.
These were followed by four appropriations of $17,000 each in the years
1863 to 1867, and two of $12,500 each in 1868 and 1869.[92] The first
work of the new secretary was to obtain a corps of efficient assistants.
To this end, he assembled all the marshals of the loyal seaboard States
at New York, and gave them instruction and opportunity to inspect
actual slavers. Congress also, for the first time, offered them proper
compensation.[93] The next six months showed the effect of this policy
in the fact that five vessels were seized and condemned, and four
slave-traders were convicted and suffered the penalty of their crimes.
"This is probably the largest number [of convictions] ever obtained, and
certainly the only ones for many years."[94]

Meantime the government opened negotiations with Great Britain, and the
treaty of 1862 was signed June 7, and carried out by Act of Congress,
July 11.[95] Specially commissioned war vessels of either government
were by this agreement authorized to search merchant vessels on the high
seas and specified coasts, and if they were found to be slavers, or, on
account of their construction or equipment, were suspected to be such,
they were to be sent for condemnation to one of the mixed courts
established at New York, Sierra Leone, and the Cape of Good Hope. These
courts, consisting of one judge and one arbitrator on the part of each
government, were to judge the facts without appeal, and upon
condemnation by them, the culprits were to be punished according to the
laws of their respective countries. The area in which this Right of
Search could be exercised was somewhat enlarged by an additional article
to the treaty, signed in 1863. In 1870 the mixed courts were abolished,
but the main part of the treaty was left in force. The Act of July 17,
1862, enabled the President to contract with foreign governments for the
apprenticing of recaptured Africans in the West Indies,[96] and in 1864
the coastwise slave-trade was forever prohibited.[97] By these measures
the trade was soon checked, and before the end of the war entirely
suppressed.[98] The vigilance of the government, however, was not
checked, and as late as 1866 a squadron of ten ships, with one hundred
and thirteen guns, patrolled the slave coast.[99] Finally, the
Thirteenth Amendment legally confirmed what the war had already
accomplished, and slavery and the slave-trade fell at one blow.[100]


FOOTNOTES:

  [1] _British and Foreign State Papers_, 1854-5, p. 1156.

  [2] Cluskey, _Political Text-Book_ (14th ed.), p. 585.

  [3] _De Bow's Review_, XXII. 223; quoted from Andrew Hunter of
      Virginia.

  [4] _Ibid._, XVIII. 628.

  [5] _Ibid._, XXII. 91, 102, 217, 221-2.

  [6] From a pamphlet entitled "A New Southern Policy, or the
      Slave Trade as meaning Union and Conservatism;" quoted in
      Etheridge's speech, Feb. 21, 1857: _Congressional Globe_, 34
      Cong. 3 sess., Appendix, p. 366.

  [7] _De Bow's Review_, XXIII. 298-320. A motion to table the
      motion on the 8th article was supported only by Kentucky,
      Tennessee, North Carolina, and Maryland. Those voting for
      Sneed's motion were Georgia, Maryland, North Carolina, and
      Tennessee. The appointment of a slave-trade committee was at
      first defeated by a vote of 48 to 44. Finally a similar motion
      was passed, 52 to 40.

  [8] _De Bow's Review_, XXIV. 473-491, 579-605. The Louisiana
      delegation alone did not vote for the last resolution, the
      vote of her delegation being evenly divided.

  [9] _De Bow's Review_, XXVII. 94-235.

 [10] H.S. Foote, in _Bench and Bar of the South and
      Southwest_, p. 69.

 [11] _De Bow's Review_, XXVII. 115.

 [12] _Ibid._, p. 99. The vote was:--

               _Yea._                _Nay._
      Alabama,         5 votes.  Tennessee,      12 votes.
      Arkansas,        4   "     Florida,         3   "
      South Carolina,  4   "     South Carolina,  4   "
      Louisiana,       6   "          Total      19
      Texas,           4   "
      Georgia,        10   "     Virginia, Maryland, Kentucky, and
      Mississippi,     7   "     North Carolina did not vote; they either
               Total  40         withdrew or were not represented.



 [13] Quoted in _26th Report of the Amer. Anti-slav. Soc._, p.
      38. The official organ was the _True Southron_.

 [14] Quoted in _24th Report of the Amer. Anti-slav. Soc._, p.
      54.

 [15] Quoted in _26th Report_, _Ibid._, p. 43.

 [16] _27th Report_, _Ibid._, pp. 19-20.

 [17] Letter of W.C. Preston, in the _National Intelligencer_,
      April 3, 1863. Also published in the pamphlet, _The African
      Slave Trade: The Secret Purpose_, etc., p. 26.

 [18] Quoted in Etheridge's speech: _Congressional Globe_, 34
      Cong. 3 sess. Appen., p. 366.

 [19] _House Journal_, 34 Cong. 3 sess. pp. 105-10;
      _Congressional Globe_, 34 Cong. 3 sess. pp. 123-6; Cluskey,
      _Political Text-Book_ (14th ed.), p. 589.

 [20] _House Journal_, 35 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 298-9. Cf. _26th
      Report of the Amer. Anti-slav. Soc._, p. 45.

 [21] Cf. _Reports of the Amer. Anti-slav. Soc._, especially
      the 26th, pp. 43-4.

 [22] _Ibid._, p. 43. He referred especially to the Treaty of
      1842.

 [23] _Ibid._; _Congressional Globe_, 35 Cong. 2 sess., Appen.,
      pp. 248-50.

 [24] _26th Report of the Amer. Anti-slav. Soc._, p. 44.

 [25] _Ibid._; _27th Report_, pp. 13-4.

 [26] _26th Report_, _Ibid._, p. 44.

 [27] Quoted in Lalor, _CyclopÃ¦dia_, III. 733; Cairnes, _The
      Slave Power_ (New York, 1862), p. 123, note; _27th Report of
      the Amer. Anti-slav. Soc._, p. 15.

 [28] Quoted in Cairnes, _The Slave Power_, p. 123, note; _27th
      Report of the Amer. Anti-slav. Soc._, p. 19.

 [29] _27th Report_, _Ibid._, p. 16; quoted from the Mobile
      _Register_.

 [30] Edition of 1859, pp. 63-4.

 [31] _De Bow's Review_, XXVII. 121, 231-5.

 [32] _Report of the Special Committee_, etc. (1857), pp. 24-5.

 [33] _26th Report of the Amer. Anti-slav. Soc._, p. 40. The
      vote was 47 to 46.

 [34] _House Exec. Doc._, 36 Cong. 2 sess. IV. No. 7, pp.
      632-6. For the State law, cf. above, Chapter II. This refusal
      of Cobb's was sharply criticised by many Southern papers. Cf.
      _26th Report of the Amer. Anti-slav. Soc._, p. 39.

 [35] New York _Independent_, March 11 and April 1, 1858.

 [36] _26th Report of the Amer. Anti-slav. Soc._, p. 41.

 [37] Gregory to the Secretary of the Navy, June 8, 1850:
      _Senate Exec. Doc._, 31 Cong. 1 sess. XIV. No. 66, p. 2. Cf.
      _Ibid._, 31 Cong. 2 sess. II. No. 6.

 [38] Cumming to Commodore Fanshawe, Feb. 22, 1850: _Senate
      Exec. Doc._, 31 Cong. 1 sess. XIV. No. 66, p. 8.

 [39] New York _Journal of Commerce_, 1857; quoted in _24th
      Report of the Amer. Anti-slav. Soc._, p. 56.

 [40] "The Slave-Trade in New York," in the _Continental
      Monthly_, January, 1862, p. 87.

 [41] New York _Evening Post_; quoted in Lalor, _CyclopÃ¦dia_,
      III. 733.

 [42] Lalor, _CyclopÃ¦dia_, III. 733; quoted from a New York
      paper.

 [43] _Friends' Appeal on behalf of the Coloured Races_ (1858),
      Appendix, p. 41; quoted from the _Journal of Commerce_.

 [44] _26th Report of the Amer. Anti-slav. Soc._, pp. 53-4;
      quoted from the African correspondent of the Boston _Journal_.
      From April, 1857, to May, 1858, twenty-one of twenty-two
      slavers which were seized by British cruisers proved to be
      American, from New York, Boston, and New Orleans. Cf. _25th
      Report_, _Ibid._, p. 122. De Bow estimated in 1856 that forty
      slavers cleared annually from Eastern harbors, clearing yearly
      $17,000,000: _De Bow's Review_, XXII. 430-1.

 [45] _Senate Exec. Doc._, 33 Cong. 1 sess. VIII. No. 47, p.
      13.

 [46] _House Exec. Doc._, 34 Cong. 1 sess. XII. No. 105, p. 38.

 [47] New York _Herald_, Aug. 5, 1860; quoted in Drake,
      _Revelations of a Slave Smuggler_, Introd., pp. vii.-viii.

 [48] _House Exec. Doc._, 35 Cong. 2 sess. IX. No. 89. Cf.
      _26th Report of the Amer. Anti-slav. Soc._, pp. 45-9.

 [49] Quoted in _26th Report of the Amer. Anti-slav. Soc._, p.
      46.

 [50] For all the above cases, cf. _Ibid._, p. 49.

 [51] Quoted in _27th Report_, _Ibid._, p. 20. Cf. _Report of
      the Secretary of the Navy_, 1859; _Senate Exec. Doc._, 36
      Cong. 1 sess. III. No. 2.

 [52] _27th Report of the Amer. Anti-slav. Soc._, p. 21.

 [53] Quoted in _Ibid._

 [54] Issue of July 22, 1860; quoted in Drake, _Revelations of
      a Slave Smuggler_, Introd., p. vi. The advertisement referred
      to was addressed to the "Ship-owners and Masters of our
      Mercantile Marine," and appeared in the Enterprise (Miss.)
      _Weekly News_, April 14, 1859. William S. Price and seventeen
      others state that they will "pay three hundred dollars per
      head for one thousand native Africans, between the ages of
      fourteen and twenty years, (of sexes equal,) likely, sound,
      and healthy, to be delivered within twelve months from this
      date, at some point accessible by land, between Pensacola,
      Fla., and Galveston, Texas; the contractors giving thirty
      days' notice as to time and place of delivery": Quoted in
      _26th Report of the Amer. Anti-slav. Soc._, pp. 41-2.

 [55] _Congressional Globe_, 35 Cong. 1 sess. p. 1362. Cf. the
      speech of a delegate from Georgia to the Democratic Convention
      at Charleston, 1860: "If any of you northern democrats will go
      home with me to my plantation, I will show you some darkies
      that I bought in Virginia, some in Delaware, some in Florida,
      and I will also show you the pure African, the noblest Roman
      of them all. I represent the African slave trade interest of
      my section:" Lalor, _CyclopÃ¦dia_, III. 733.

 [56] _Senate Misc. Doc._, 36 Cong. 1 sess. No. 8.

 [57] _Senate Journal_, 34 Cong. 1-2 sess. pp. 396, 695-8;
      _Senate Reports_, 34 Cong. 1 sess. I. No. 195.

 [58] _House Journal_, 31 Cong. 2 sess. p. 64. There was still
      another attempt by Sandidge. Cf. _26th Report of the Amer.
      Anti-Slav. Soc._, p. 44.

 [59] _Senate Journal_, 36 Cong. 1 sess. p. 274; _Congressional
      Globe_, 36 Cong. 1 sess. p. 1245.

 [60] Congressional Globe, 32 Cong. 2 sess. p. 1072.

 [61] I.e., since 1846: _Statutes at Large_, XI. 90.

 [62] _Ibid._, XI. 227.

 [63] _Ibid._, XI. 404.

 [64] _Ibid._, XII. 21.

 [65] E.g., Clay's resolutions: _Congressional Globe_, 31 Cong.
      2 sess. pp. 304-9. Clayton's resolutions: _Senate Journal_, 33
      Cong. 1 sess. p. 404; _House Journal_, 33 Cong. 1 sess. pp.
      1093, 1332-3; _Congressional Globe_, 33 Cong. 1 sess. pp.
      1591-3, 2139. Seward's bill: _Senate Journal_, 33 Cong. 1
      sess. pp. 448, 451.

 [66] Mr. Blair of Missouri asked unanimous consent in
      Congress, Dec. 23, 1858, to a resolution instructing the
      Judiciary Committee to bring in such a bill; Houston of
      Alabama objected: _Congressional Globe_, 35 Cong. 2 sess. p.
      198; _26th Report of the Amer. Anti-slav. Soc._, p. 44.

 [67] This was the object of attack in 1851 and 1853 by
      Giddings: _House Journal_, 32 Cong. 1 sess. p. 42; 33 Cong. 1
      sess. p. 147. Cf. _House Journal_, 38 Cong. 1 sess. p. 46.

 [68] By Mr. Wilson, March 20, 1860: _Senate Journal_, 36 Cong.
      1 sess. p. 274.

 [69] Four or five such attempts were made: Dec. 12, 1860,
      _House Journal_, 36 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 61-2; Jan. 7, 1861,
      _Congressional Globe_, 36 Cong. 2 sess. p. 279; Jan. 23, 1861,
      _Ibid._, p. 527; Feb. 1, 1861, _Ibid._, p. 690; Feb. 27, 1861,
      _Ibid._, pp. 1243, 1259.

 [70] "The Slave-Trade in New York," in the _Continental
      Monthly_, January, 1862, p. 87.

 [71] New York _Herald_, July 14, 1856.

 [72] _Ibid._ Cf. _Senate Exec. Doc._, 37 Cong. 2 sess. V. No.
      53.

 [73] _27th Report of the Amer. Anti-slav. Soc._, pp. 25-6. Cf.
      _26th Report_, _Ibid._, pp. 45-9.

 [74] _27th Report_, _Ibid._, pp. 26-7.

 [75] _26th Report_, _Ibid._, p. 54.

 [76] _British and Foreign State Papers_, 1859-60, pp. 899,
      973.

 [77] Nov. 29, 1851: _House Exec. Doc._, 32 Cong. 1 sess. II.
      pt. 2, No. 2, p. 4.

 [78] Dec. 4, 1852: _House Exec. Doc._, 32 Cong. 2 sess. I. pt.
      2, No. 1, p. 293.

 [79] _Ibid._, 34 Cong. 1 sess. I. pt. 3, No. 1, p. 5.

 [80] _Ibid._, 34 Cong. 3 sess. I. pt. 2, No. 1, p. 407.

 [81] Commander Burgess to Commodore Wise, Whydah, Aug. 12,
      1857: _Parliamentary Papers_, 1857-8, vol. LXI. _Slave Trade_,
      Class A, p. 136.

 [82] _House Exec. Doc._, 35 Cong. 1 sess. II. pt. 3, No. 2, p.
      576.

 [83] _Ibid._, 35 Cong. 2 sess. II. pt. 1, No. 2, pp. 14-15,
      31-33.

 [84] _Senate Exec. Doc._, 36 Cong. 2 sess. I. No. 1, p. 24.
      The Report of the Secretary of the Navy, 1859, contains this
      ambiguous passage: "What the effect of breaking up the trade
      will be upon the United States or Cuba it is not necessary to
      inquire; certainly, under the laws of Congress and our treaty
      obligations, it is the duty of the executive government to see
      that our citizens shall not be engaged in it": _Ibid._, 36
      Cong. 1 sess. III. No. 2, pp. 1138-9.

 [85] _Senate Exec. Doc._, 36 Cong. 2 sess. III. pt. 1, No. 1,
      pp. 8-9.

 [86] _Statutes at Large_, XII. 40.

 [87] _Confederate States of America Statutes at Large_, 1861,
      p. 15, Constitution, Art. 1, sect. 9, Â§Â§ 1, 2.

 [88] From an intercepted circular despatch from J.P. Benjamin,
      "Secretary of State," addressed in this particular instance to
      Hon. L.Q.C. Lamar, "Commissioner, etc., St. Petersburg,
      Russia," and dated Richmond, Jan. 15, 1863; published in the
      _National Intelligencer_, March 31, 1863; cf. also the issues
      of Feb. 19, 1861, April 2, 3, 25, 1863; also published in the
      pamphlet, _The African Slave-Trade: The Secret Purpose_, etc.
      The editors vouch for its authenticity, and state it to be in
      Benjamin's own handwriting.

 [89] L.W. Spratt of South Carolina, in the _Southern Literary
      Messenger_, June, 1861, XXXII. 414, 420. Cf. also the
      Charleston _Mercury_, Feb. 13, 1861, and the _National
      Intelligencer_, Feb. 19, 1861.

 [90] Captain Gordon of the slaver "Erie;" condemned in the
      U.S. District Court for Southern New York in 1862. Cf. _Senate
      Exec. Doc._, 37 Cong. 2 sess. I. No. 1, p. 13.

 [91] _Ibid._, pp. 453-4.

 [92] _Statutes at Large_, XII. 132, 219, 639; XIII. 424; XIV.
      226, 415; XV. 58, 321. The sum of $250,000 was also
      appropriated to return the slaves on the "Wildfire": _Ibid._,
      XII. 40-41.

 [93] _Statutes at Large_, XII. 368-9.

 [94] _Senate Exec. Doc._, 37 Cong. 2 sess. I. No. 1, pp.
      453-4.

 [95] _Statutes at Large_, XII. 531.

 [96] For a time not exceeding five years: _Ibid._, pp. 592-3.

 [97] By section 9 of an appropriation act for civil expenses,
      July 2, 1864: _Ibid._, XIII. 353.

 [98] British officers attested this: _Diplomatic
      Correspondence_, 1862, p. 285.

 [99] _Report of the Secretary of the Navy_, 1866; _House Exec.
      Doc._, 39 Cong. 2 sess. IV. p. 12.

[100] There were some later attempts to legislate. Sumner
      tried to repeal the Act of 1803: _Congressional Globe_, 41
      Cong. 2 sess. pp. 2894, 2932, 4953, 5594. Banks introduced a
      bill to prohibit Americans owning or dealing in slaves abroad:
      _House Journal_, 42 Cong. 2 sess. p. 48. For the legislation
      of the Confederate States, cf. Mason, _Veto Power_, 2d ed.,
      Appendix C, No. 1.

                    *       *       *       *       *




_Chapter XII_

THE ESSENTIALS IN THE STRUGGLE.

  92. How the Question Arose.
  93. The Moral Movement.
  94. The Political Movement.
  95. The Economic Movement.
  96. The Lesson for Americans.


92. ~How the Question Arose.~ We have followed a chapter of history
which is of peculiar interest to the sociologist. Here was a rich new
land, the wealth of which was to be had in return for ordinary manual
labor. Had the country been conceived of as existing primarily for the
benefit of its actual inhabitants, it might have waited for natural
increase or immigration to supply the needed hands; but both Europe and
the earlier colonists themselves regarded this land as existing chiefly
for the benefit of Europe, and as designed to be exploited, as rapidly
and ruthlessly as possible, of the boundless wealth of its resources.
This was the primary excuse for the rise of the African slave-trade to
America.

Every experiment of such a kind, however, where the moral standard of a
people is lowered for the sake of a material advantage, is dangerous in
just such proportion as that advantage is great. In this case it was
great. For at least a century, in the West Indies and the southern
United States, agriculture flourished, trade increased, and English
manufactures were nourished, in just such proportion as Americans stole
Negroes and worked them to death. This advantage, to be sure, became
much smaller in later times, and at one critical period was, at least in
the Southern States, almost _nil_; but energetic efforts were wanting,
and, before the nation was aware, slavery had seized a new and well-nigh
immovable footing in the Cotton Kingdom.

The colonists averred with perfect truth that they did not commence this
fatal traffic, but that it was imposed upon them from without.
Nevertheless, all too soon did they lay aside scruples against it and
hasten to share its material benefits. Even those who braved the rough
Atlantic for the highest moral motives fell early victims to the
allurements of this system. Thus, throughout colonial history, in spite
of many honest attempts to stop the further pursuit of the slave-trade,
we notice back of nearly all such attempts a certain moral apathy, an
indisposition to attack the evil with the sharp weapons which its nature
demanded. Consequently, there developed steadily, irresistibly, a vast
social problem, which required two centuries and a half for a nation of
trained European stock and boasted moral fibre to solve.


93. ~The Moral Movement.~ For the solution of this problem there were,
roughly speaking, three classes of efforts made during this
time,--moral, political, and economic: that is to say, efforts which
sought directly to raise the moral standard of the nation; efforts which
sought to stop the trade by legal enactment; efforts which sought to
neutralize the economic advantages of the slave-trade. There is always a
certain glamour about the idea of a nation rising up to crush an evil
simply because it is wrong. Unfortunately, this can seldom be realized
in real life; for the very existence of the evil usually argues a moral
weakness in the very place where extraordinary moral strength is called
for. This was the case in the early history of the colonies; and
experience proved that an appeal to moral rectitude was unheard in
Carolina when rice had become a great crop, and in Massachusetts when
the rum-slave-traffic was paying a profit of 100%. That the various
abolition societies and anti-slavery movements did heroic work in
rousing the national conscience is certainly true; unfortunately,
however, these movements were weakest at the most critical times. When,
in 1774 and 1804, the material advantages of the slave-trade and the
institution of slavery were least, it seemed possible that moral suasion
might accomplish the abolition of both. A fatal spirit of temporizing,
however, seized the nation at these points; and although the slave-trade
was, largely for political reasons, forbidden, slavery was left
untouched. Beyond this point, as years rolled by, it was found well-nigh
impossible to rouse the moral sense of the nation. Even in the matter of
enforcing its own laws and co-operating with the civilized world, a
lethargy seized the country, and it did not awake until slavery was
about to destroy it. Even then, after a long and earnest crusade, the
national sense of right did not rise to the entire abolition of
slavery. It was only a peculiar and almost fortuitous commingling of
moral, political, and economic motives that eventually crushed African
slavery and its handmaid, the slave-trade in America.


94. ~The Political Movement.~ The political efforts to limit the
slave-trade were the outcome partly of moral reprobation of the trade,
partly of motives of expediency. This legislation was never such as wise
and powerful rulers may make for a nation, with the ulterior purpose of
calling in the respect which the nation has for law to aid in raising
its standard of right. The colonial and national laws on the slave-trade
merely registered, from time to time, the average public opinion
concerning this traffic, and are therefore to be regarded as negative
signs rather than as positive efforts. These signs were, from one point
of view, evidences of moral awakening; they indicated slow, steady
development of the idea that to steal even Negroes was wrong. From
another point of view, these laws showed the fear of servile
insurrection and the desire to ward off danger from the State; again,
they often indicated a desire to appear well before the civilized world,
and to rid the "land of the free" of the paradox of slavery.
Representing such motives, the laws varied all the way from mere
regulating acts to absolute prohibitions. On the whole, these acts were
poorly conceived, loosely drawn, and wretchedly enforced. The systematic
violation of the provisions of many of them led to a widespread belief
that enforcement was, in the nature of the case, impossible; and thus,
instead of marking ground already won, they were too often sources of
distinct moral deterioration. Certainly the carnival of lawlessness that
succeeded the Act of 1807, and that which preceded final suppression in
1861, were glaring examples of the failure of the efforts to suppress
the slave-trade by mere law.


95. ~The Economic Movement.~ Economic measures against the trade were
those which from the beginning had the best chance of success, but which
were least tried. They included tariff measures; efforts to encourage
the immigration of free laborers and the emigration of the slaves;
measures for changing the character of Southern industry; and, finally,
plans to restore the economic balance which slavery destroyed, by
raising the condition of the slave to that of complete freedom and
responsibility. Like the political efforts, these rested in part on a
moral basis; and, as legal enactments, they were also themselves often
political measures. They differed, however, from purely moral and
political efforts, in having as a main motive the economic gain which a
substitution of free for slave labor promised.

The simplest form of such efforts was the revenue duty on slaves that
existed in all the colonies. This developed into the prohibitive tariff,
and into measures encouraging immigration or industrial improvements.
The colonization movement was another form of these efforts; it was
inadequately conceived, and not altogether sincere, but it had a sound,
although in this case impracticable, economic basis. The one great
measure which finally stopped the slave-trade forever was, naturally,
the abolition of slavery, i.e., the giving to the Negro the right to
sell his labor at a price consistent with his own welfare. The abolition
of slavery itself, while due in part to direct moral appeal and
political sagacity, was largely the result of the economic collapse of
the large-farming slave system.


96. ~The Lesson for Americans.~ It may be doubted if ever before such
political mistakes as the slavery compromises of the Constitutional
Convention had such serious results, and yet, by a succession of
unexpected accidents, still left a nation in position to work out its
destiny. No American can study the connection of slavery with United
States history, and not devoutly pray that his country may never have a
similar social problem to solve, until it shows more capacity for such
work than it has shown in the past. It is neither profitable nor in
accordance with scientific truth to consider that whatever the
constitutional fathers did was right, or that slavery was a plague sent
from God and fated to be eliminated in due time. We must face the fact
that this problem arose principally from the cupidity and carelessness
of our ancestors. It was the plain duty of the colonies to crush the
trade and the system in its infancy: they preferred to enrich themselves
on its profits. It was the plain duty of a Revolution based upon
"Liberty" to take steps toward the abolition of slavery: it preferred
promises to straightforward action. It was the plain duty of the
Constitutional Convention, in founding a new nation, to compromise with
a threatening social evil only in case its settlement would thereby be
postponed to a more favorable time: this was not the case in the slavery
and the slave-trade compromises; there never was a time in the history
of America when the system had a slighter economic, political, and moral
justification than in 1787; and yet with this real, existent, growing
evil before their eyes, a bargain largely of dollars and cents was
allowed to open the highway that led straight to the Civil War.
Moreover, it was due to no wisdom and foresight on the part of the
fathers that fortuitous circumstances made the result of that war what
it was, nor was it due to exceptional philanthropy on the part of their
descendants that that result included the abolition of slavery.

With the faith of the nation broken at the very outset, the system of
slavery untouched, and twenty years' respite given to the slave-trade to
feed and foster it, there began, with 1787, that system of bargaining,
truckling, and compromising with a moral, political, and economic
monstrosity, which makes the history of our dealing with slavery in the
first half of the nineteenth century so discreditable to a great people.
Each generation sought to shift its load upon the next, and the burden
rolled on, until a generation came which was both too weak and too
strong to bear it longer. One cannot, to be sure, demand of whole
nations exceptional moral foresight and heroism; but a certain hard
common-sense in facing the complicated phenomena of political life must
be expected in every progressive people. In some respects we as a nation
seem to lack this; we have the somewhat inchoate idea that we are not
destined to be harassed with great social questions, and that even if we
are, and fail to answer them, the fault is with the question and not
with us. Consequently we often congratulate ourselves more on getting
rid of a problem than on solving it. Such an attitude is dangerous; we
have and shall have, as other peoples have had, critical, momentous, and
pressing questions to answer. The riddle of the Sphinx may be postponed,
it may be evasively answered now; sometime it must be fully answered.

It behooves the United States, therefore, in the interest both of
scientific truth and of future social reform, carefully to study such
chapters of her history as that of the suppression of the slave-trade.
The most obvious question which this study suggests is: How far in a
State can a recognized moral wrong safely be compromised? And although
this chapter of history can give us no definite answer suited to the
ever-varying aspects of political life, yet it would seem to warn any
nation from allowing, through carelessness and moral cowardice, any
social evil to grow. No persons would have seen the Civil War with more
surprise and horror than the Revolutionists of 1776; yet from the small
and apparently dying institution of their day arose the walled and
castled Slave-Power. From this we may conclude that it behooves nations
as well as men to do things at the very moment when they ought to be
done.

                    *       *       *       *       *



APPENDIX A.

A CHRONOLOGICAL CONSPECTUS OF COLONIAL AND STATE LEGISLATION RESTRICTING
THE AFRICAN SLAVE-TRADE. 1641-1787.


~1641. Massachusetts: Limitations on Slavery.~

"Liberties of Forreiners & Strangers": 91. "There shall never be any
bond slaverie villinage or Captivitie amongst vs, unles it be lawfull
Captives taken in iust warres, & such strangers as willingly selle
themselves or are sold to us. And those shall have all the liberties &
Christian usages w^{ch} y^e law of god established in Jsraell concerning
such p/^{sons} doeth morally require. This exempts none from servitude
who shall be Judged there to by Authoritie."

"Capitall Laws": 10. "If any man stealeth aman or mankinde, he shall
surely be put to death" (marginal reference, Exodus xxi. 16). Re-enacted
in the codes of 1649, 1660, and 1672. Whitmore, _Reprint of Colonial
Laws of 1660_, etc. (1889), pp. 52, 54, 71-117.


~1642, April 3. New Netherland: Ten per cent Duty.~

"Ordinance of the Director and Council of New Netherland, imposing
certain Import and Export Duties." O'Callaghan, _Laws of New Netherland_
(1868), p. 31.


~1642, Dec. 1. Connecticut: Man-Stealing made a Capital Offence.~

"Capitall Lawes," No. 10. Re-enacted in Ludlow's code, 1650. _Colonial
Records_, I. 77.


~1646, Nov. 4. Massachusetts: Declaration against Man-Stealing.~

Testimony of the General Court. For text, see above, page 37. _Colonial
Records_, II. 168; III. 84.


~1652, April 4. New Netherland: Duty of 15 Guilders.~

"Conditions and Regulations" of Trade to Africa. O'Callaghan, _Laws of
New Netherland_, pp. 81, 127.


~1652, May 18-20. Rhode Island: Perpetual Slavery Prohibited.~

For text, see above, page 40. _Colonial Records_, I. 243.


~1655, Aug. 6. New Netherland: Ten per cent Export Duty.~

"Ordinance of the Director General and Council of New Netherland,
imposing a Duty on exported Negroes." O'Callaghan, _Laws of New
Netherland_, p. 191.


~1664, March 12. Duke of York's Patent: Slavery Regulated.~

"Lawes establisht by the Authority of his Majesties Letters patents,
granted to his Royall Highnes James Duke of Yorke and Albany; Bearing
Date the 12th Day of March in the Sixteenth year of the Raigne of our
Soveraigne Lord Kinge Charles the Second." First published at Long
Island in 1664.

"Bond slavery": "No Christian shall be kept in Bond-slavery villenage or
Captivity, Except Such who shall be Judged thereunto by Authority, or
such as willingly have sould, or shall sell themselves," etc.
Apprenticeship allowed. _Charter to William Penn, and Laws of the
Province of Pennsylvania_ (1879), pp. 3, 12.


~1672, October. Connecticut: Law against Man-Stealing.~

"The General Laws and Liberties of Conecticut

"Capital Laws": 10. "If any Man stealeth a Man or Man kinde, and selleth
him, or if he be found in his hand, he shall be put to death. Exod. 21.
16." _Laws of Connecticut_, 1672 (repr. 1865), p. 9.


~1676, March 3. West New Jersey: Slavery Prohibited (?).~

"The Concessions and Agreements of the Proprietors, Freeholders and
Inhabitants of the Province of West New-Jersey, in America."

Chap. XXIII. "That in all publick Courts of Justice for Tryals of
Causes, Civil or Criminal, any Person or Persons, Inhabitants of the
said Province, may freely come into, and attend the said Courts, ...
that all and every Person and Persons Inhabiting the said Province,
shall, as far as in us lies, be free from Oppression and Slavery."
Leaming and Spicer, _Grants, Concessions_, etc., pp. 382, 398.


~1688, Feb. 18. Pennsylvania: First Protest of Friends against
Slave-Trade.~

"At Monthly Meeting of Germantown Friends." For text, see above, pages
28-29. _Fac-simile Copy_ (1880).


~1695, May. Maryland: 10s. Duty Act.~

"An Act for the laying an Imposition upon Negroes, Slaves, and White
Persons imported into this Province." Re-enacted in 1696, and included
in Acts of 1699 and 1704. Bacon, _Laws_, 1695, ch. ix.; 1696, ch. vii.;
1699, ch. xxiii.; 1704, ch. ix.


~1696. Pennsylvania: Protest of Friends.~

"That Friends be careful not to encourage the bringing in of any more
negroes." Bettle, _Notices of Negro Slavery_, in _Penn. Hist. Soc. Mem._
(1864), I. 383.


~1698, Oct. 8. South Carolina: White Servants Encouraged.~

"An Act for the Encouragement of the Importation of White Servants."

"Whereas, the great number of negroes which of late have been imported
into this Collony may endanger the safety thereof if speedy care be not
taken and encouragement given for the importation of white servants."

Â§ 1. Â£13 are to be given to any ship master for every male white servant
(Irish excepted), between sixteen and forty years, whom he shall bring
into Ashley river; and Â£12 for boys between twelve and sixteen years.
Every servant must have at least four years to serve, and every boy
seven years.

Â§ 3. Planters are to take servants in proportion of one to every six
male Negroes above sixteen years.

Â§ 5. Servants are to be distributed by lot.

Â§ 8. This act to continue three years. Cooper, _Statutes_, II. 153.


~1699, April. Virginia: 20s. Duty Act.~

"An act for laying an imposition upon servants and slaves imported into
this country, towards building the Capitoll." For three years; continued
in August, 1701, and April, 1704. Hening, _Statutes_, III. 193, 212,
225.


~1703, May 6. South Carolina: Duty Act.~

"An Act for the laying an Imposition on Furrs, Skinns, Liquors and other
Goods and Merchandize, Imported into and Exported out of this part of
this Province, for the raising of a Fund of Money towards defraying the
publick charges and expenses of this Province, and paying the debts due
for the Expedition against St. Augustine." 10_s._ on Africans and 20_s._
on others. Cooper, _Statutes_, II. 201.


~1704, October. Maryland: 20s. Duty Act.~

"An Act imposing Three Pence per Gallon on Rum and Wine, Brandy and
Spirits; and Twenty Shillings per Poll for Negroes; for raising a Supply
to defray the Public Charge of this Province; and Twenty Shillings per
Poll on Irish Servants, to prevent the importing too great a Number of
Irish Papists into this Province." Revived in 1708 and 1712. Bacon,
_Laws_, 1704, ch. xxxiii.; 1708, ch. xvi.; 1712, ch. xxii.


~1705, Jan. 12. Pennsylvania: 10s. Duty Act. ~

"An Act for Raising a Supply of Two pence half penny per Pound & ten
shillings per Head. Also for Granting an Impost & laying on Sundry
Liquors & negroes Imported into this Province for the Support of
Governmt., & defraying the necessary Publick Charges in the
Administration thereof." _Colonial Records_ (1852), II. 232, No. 50.


~1705, October. Virginia: 6d. Tax on Imported Slaves.~

"An act for raising a publick revenue for the better support of the
Government," etc. Similar tax by Act of October, 1710. Hening,
_Statutes_, III. 344, 490.


~1705, October. Virginia: 20s. Duty Act.~

"An act for laying an Imposition upon Liquors and Slaves." For two
years; re-enacted in October, 1710, for three years, and in October,
1712. _Ibid._, III. 229, 482; IV. 30.


~1705, Dec. 5. Massachusetts: Â£4 Duty Act.~

"An act for the Better Preventing of a Spurious and Mixt Issue," etc.

Â§ 6. On and after May 1, 1706, every master importing Negroes shall
enter his number, name, and sex in the impost office, and insert them in
the bill of lading; he shall pay to the commissioner and receiver of the
impost Â£4 per head for every such Negro. Both master and ship are to be
security for the payment of the same.

Â§ 7. If the master neglect to enter the slaves, he shall forfeit Â£8 for
each Negro, one-half to go to the informer and one-half to the
government.

Â§ 8. If any Negro imported shall, within twelve months, be exported and
sold in any other plantation, and a receipt from the collector there be
shown, a drawback of the whole duty will be allowed. Like drawback will
be allowed a purchaser, if any Negro sold die within six weeks after
importation. _Mass. Province Laws, 1705-6_, ch. 10.


~1708, February. Rhode Island: Â£3 Duty Act.~

No title or text found. Slightly amended by Act of April, 1708;
strengthened by Acts of February, 1712, and July 5, 1715; proceeds
disposed of by Acts of July, 1715, October, 1717, and June, 1729.
_Colonial Records_, IV. 34, 131-5, 138, 143, 191-3, 225, 423-4.


~1709, Sept. 24. New York: Â£3 Duty Act.~

"An Act for Laying a Duty on the Tonnage of Vessels and Slaves." A duty
of Â£3 was laid on slaves not imported directly from their native
country. Continued by Act of Oct. 30, 1710. _Acts of Assembly,
1691-1718_, pp. 97, 125, 134; Laws of New York, 1691-1773, p. 83.


~1710, Dec. 28. Pennsylvania: 40s. Duty Act.~

"An impost Act, laying a duty on Negroes, wine, rum and other spirits,
cyder and vessels." Repealed by order in Council Feb. 20, 1713. Carey
and Bioren, _Laws_, I. 82; Bettle, _Notices of Negro Slavery_, in _Penn.
Hist. Soc. Mem._ (1864), I. 415.


~1710. Virginia: Â£5 Duty Act.~

"Intended to discourage the importation" of slaves. Title and text not
found. Disallowed (?). _Governor Spotswood to the Lords of Trade_, in
_Va. Hist. Soc. Coll._, New Series, I. 52.


~1711, July-Aug. New York: Act of 1709 Strengthened.~

"An Act for the more effectual putting in Execution an Act of General
Assembly, Intituled, An Act for Laying a Duty on the Tonnage of Vessels
and Slaves." _Acts of Assembly, 1691-1718_, p. 134.


~1711, December. New York: Bill to Increase Duty.~

Bill for laying a further duty on slaves. Passed Assembly; lost in
Council. _Doc. rel. Col. Hist. New York_, V. 293.


~1711. Pennsylvania: Testimony of Quakers.~

" ... the Yearly Meeting of Philadelphia, on a representation from the
Quarterly Meeting of Chester, that the buying and encouraging the
importation of negroes was still practised by some of the members of the
society, again repeated and enforced the observance of the advice issued
in 1696, and further directed all merchants and factors to write to
their correspondents and discourage their sending any more negroes."
Bettle, _Notices of Negro Slavery_, in _Penn. Hist. Soc. Mem._ (1864),
I. 386.


~1712, June 7. Pennsylvania: Prohibitive (?) Duty Act.~

"A supplementary Act to an act, entituled, An impost act, laying a duty
on Negroes, rum," etc. Disallowed by Great Britain, 1713. Carey and
Bioren, _Laws_, I. 87, 88. Cf. _Colonial Records_ (1852), II. 553.


~1712, June 7. Pennsylvania: Prohibitive Duty Act.~

"An act to prevent the Importation of Negroes and Indians into this
Province."

"Whereas Divers Plots and Insurrections have frequently happened, not
only in the Islands, but on the Main Land of _America_, by Negroes,
which have been carried on so far that several of the Inhabitants have
been thereby barbarously Murthered, an instance whereof we have lately
had in our neighboring Colony of _New York_. And whereas the
Importation of Indian Slaves hath given our Neighboring _Indians_ in
this Province some umbrage of Suspicion and Dis-satisfaction. For
Prevention of all which for the future,

"_Be it Enacted_ ..., That from and after the Publication of this Act,
upon the Importation of any Negro or Indian, by Land or Water, into this
Province, there shall be paid by the Importer, Owner or Possessor
thereof, the sum of _Twenty Pounds per head_, for every Negro or Indian
so imported or brought in (except Negroes directly brought in from the
_West India Islands_ before the first Day of the Month called _August_
next) unto the proper Officer herein after named, or that shall be
appointed according to the Directions of this Act to receive the same,"
etc. Disallowed by Great Britain, 1713. _Laws of Pennsylvania,
collected_, etc. (ed. 1714), p. 165; _Colonial Records_ (1852), II. 553;
Burge, _Commentaries_, I. 737, note; _Penn. Archives_, I. 162.


~1713, March 11. New Jersey: Â£10 Duty Act.~

"An Act for laying a Duty on Negro, Indian and Mulatto Slaves, imported
and brought into this Province."

"_Be it Enacted_ ..., That every Person or Persons that shall hereafter
Import or bring in, or cause to be imported or brought into this
Province, any Negro Indian or Mulatto Slave or Slaves, every such Person
or Persons so importing or bringing in, or causing to be imported or
brought in, such Slave or Slaves, shall enter with one of the Collectors
of her Majestie's Customs of this Province, every such Slave or Slaves,
within Twenty Four Hours after such Slave or Slaves is so Imported, and
pay the Sum of _Ten Pounds_ Money as appointed by her Majesty's
Proclamation, for each Slave so imported, or give sufficient Security
that the said Sum of _Ten Pounds_, Money aforesaid, shall be well and
truly paid within three Months after such Slave or Slaves are so
imported, to the Collector or his Deputy of the District into which
such Slave or Slaves shall be imported, for the use of her Majesty, her
Heirs and Successors, toward the Support of the Government of this
Province." For seven years; violations incur forfeiture and sale of
slaves at auction; slaves brought from elsewhere than Africa to pay Â£10,
etc. _Laws and Acts of New Jersey, 1703-1717_ (ed. 1717), p. 43; _N.J.
Archives_, 1st Series, XIII. 516, 517, 520, 522, 523, 527, 532, 541.


~1713, March 26. Great Britain and Spain: The Assiento.~

"The Assiento, or Contract for allowing to the Subjects of Great Britain
the Liberty of importing Negroes into the Spanish America. Signed by the
Catholick King at Madrid, the 26th Day of March, 1713."

Art. I. "First then to procure, by this means, a mutual and reciprocal
advantage to the sovereigns and subjects of both crowns, her British
majesty does offer and undertake for the persons, whom she shall name
and appoint, That they shall oblige and charge themselves with the
bringing into the West-Indies of America, belonging to his catholick
majesty, in the space of the said 30 years, to commence on the 1st day
of May, 1713, and determine on the like day, which will be in the year
1743, _viz._ 144000 negroes, _Piezas de India_, of both sexes, and of
all ages, at the rate of 4800 negroes, _Piezas de India_, in each of the
said 30 years, with this condition, That the persons who shall go to the
West-Indies to take care of the concerns of the assiento, shall avoid
giving any offence, for in such case they shall be prosecuted and
punished in the same manner, as they would have been in Spain, if the
like misdemeanors had been committed there."

Art. II. Assientists to pay a duty of 33 pieces of eight (_Escudos_) for
each Negro, which should include all duties.

Art. III. Assientists to advance to his Catholic Majesty 200,000 pieces
of eight, which should be returned at the end of the first twenty years,
etc. John Almon, _Treaties of Peace, Alliance, and Commerce, between
Great-Britain and other Powers_ (London, 1772), I. 83-107.


~1713, July 13. Great Britain and Spain: Treaty of Utrecht.~

"Treaty of Peace and Friendship between the most serene and most potent
princess Anne, by the grace of God, Queen of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. and the most serene and most potent
Prince Philip V the Catholick King of Spain, concluded at Utrecht, the
2/13 Day of July, 1713."

Art. XII. "The Catholick King doth furthermore hereby give and grant to
her Britannick majesty, and to the company of her subjects appointed for
that purpose, as well the subjects of Spain, as all others, being
excluded, the contract for introducing negroes into several parts of the
dominions of his Catholick Majesty in America, commonly called _el Pacto
de el Assiento de Negros_, for the space of thirty years successively,
beginning from the first day of the month of May, in the year 1713, with
the same conditions on which the French enjoyed it, or at any time might
or ought to enjoy the same, together with a tract or tracts of Land to
be allotted by the said Catholick King, and to be granted to the company
aforesaid, commonly called _la Compania de el Assiento_, in some
convenient place on the river of Plata, (no duties or revenues being
payable by the said company on that account, during the time of the
abovementioned contract, and no longer) and this settlement of the said
society, or those tracts of land, shall be proper and sufficient for
planting, and sowing, and for feeding cattle for the subsistence of
those who are in the service of the said company, and of their negroes;
and that the said negroes may be there kept in safety till they are
sold; and moreover, that the ships belonging to the said company may
come close to land, and be secure from any danger. But it shall always
be lawful for the Catholick King, to appoint an officer in the said
place or settlement, who may take care that nothing be done or practised
contrary to his royal interests. And all who manage the affairs of the
said company there, or belong to it, shall be subject to the inspection
of the aforesaid officer, as to all matters relating to the tracts of
land abovementioned. But if any doubts, difficulties, or controversies,
should arise between the said officer and the managers for the said
company, they shall be referred to the determination of the governor of
Buenos Ayres. The Catholick King has been likewise pleased to grant to
the said company, several other extraordinary advantages, which are more
fully and amply explained in the contract of the Assiento, which was
made and concluded at Madrid, the 26th day of the month of March, of
this present year 1713. Which contract, or _Assiento de Negros_, and all
the clauses, conditions, privileges and immunities contained therein,
and which are not contrary to this article, are and shall be deemed, and
taken to be, part of this treaty, in the same manner as if they had been
here inserted word for word." John Almon, _Treaties of Peace, Alliance,
and Commerce, between Great-Britain and other Powers_, I. 168-80.


~1714, Feb. 18. South Carolina: Duty on American Slaves.~

"An Act for laying an additional duty on all Negro Slaves imported into
this Province from any part of America." Title quoted in Act of 1719,
Â§30, _q.v._


~1714, Dec. 18. South Carolina: Prohibitive Duty.~

"An additional Act to an Act entitled 'An Act for the better Ordering
and Governing Negroes and all other Slaves.'"

Â§9 "And _whereas_, the number of negroes do extremely increase in this
Province, and through the afflicting providence of God, the white
persons do not proportionally multiply, by reason whereof, the safety
of the said Province is greatly endangered; for the prevention of which
for the future,

"_Be it further enacted_ by the authority aforesaid, That all negro
slaves from twelve years old and upwards, imported into this part of
this Province from any part of Africa, shall pay such additional duties
as is hereafter named, that is to say:--that every merchant or other
person whatsoever, who shall, six months after the ratification of this
Act, import any negro slaves as aforesaid, shall, for every such slave,
pay unto the public receiver for the time being, (within thirty days
after such importation,) the sum of two pounds current money of this
Province." Cooper, _Statutes_, VII. 365.


~1715, Feb. 18. South Carolina: Duty on American Negroes.~

"_An additional Act_ to an act entitled _an act for raising the sum of
Â£2000, of and from the estates real and personal of the inhabitants of
this Province, ratified in open Assembly the 18th day of December,
1714_; and for laying an additional duty on all Negroe slaves imported
into this Province from any part of America." Title only given. GrimkÃ©,
_Public Laws_, p. xvi, No. 362.


~1715, May 28. Pennsylvania: Â£5 Duty Act.~

"An Act for laying a Duty on _Negroes_ imported into this province."
Disallowed by Great Britain, 1719. _Acts and Laws of Pennsylvania,
1715_, p. 270; _Colonial Records_ (1852), III. 75-6; Chalmers,
_Opinions_, II. 118.


~1715, June 3. Maryland: 20s. Duty Act.~

"An Act laying an Imposition on Negroes ...; and also on Irish Servants,
to prevent the importing too great a Number of Irish Papists into this
Province." Supplemented April 23, 1735, and July 25, 1754. _Compleat
Collection of the Laws of Maryland_ (ed. 1727), p. 157; Bacon, _Laws_,
1715, ch. xxxvi. Â§8; 1735, ch. vi. Â§Â§1-3; _Acts of Assembly, 1754_, p.
10.


~1716, June 30. South Carolina: Â£3 Duty Act.~

"An Act for laying an Imposition on Liquors, Goods and Merchandizes,
Imported into and Exported out of this Province, for the raising of a
Fund of Money towards the defraying the publick charges and expences of
the Government." A duty of Â£3 was laid on African slaves, and Â£30 on
American slaves. Cooper, _Statutes_, II. 649.


~1716. New York: 5 oz. and 10 oz. plate Duty Act.~

"An Act to Oblige all Vessels Trading into this Colony (except such as
are therein excepted) to pay a certain Duty; and for the further
Explanation and rendring more Effectual certain Clauses in an Act of
General Assembly of this Colony, Intituled, An Act by which a Duty is
laid on Negroes, and other Slaves, imported into this Colony." The act
referred to is not to be found. _Acts of Assembly, 1691-1718_, p. 224.


~1717, June 8. Maryland: Additional 20s. Duty Act.~

"An Act for laying an Additional Duty of Twenty Shillings Current Money
per Poll on all Irish Servants, ... also, the Additional Duty of Twenty
Shillings Current Money per Poll on all Negroes, for raising a Fund for
the Use of Publick Schools," etc. Continued by Act of 1728. _Compleat
Collection of the Laws of Maryland_ (ed. 1727), p. 191; Bacon, _Laws_,
1728, ch. viii.


~1717, Dec. 11. South Carolina: Prohibitive Duty.~

"A further additional Act to an Act entitled An Act for the better
ordering and governing of Negroes and all other Slaves; and to an
additional Act to an Act entitled An Act for the better ordering and
governing of Negroes and all other Slaves."

Â§ 3. "And _whereas_, the great importation of negroes to this Province,
in proportion to the white inhabitants of the same, whereby the future
safety of this Province will be greatly endangered; for the prevention
whereof,

"_Be it enacted_ by the authority aforesaid, That all negro slaves of
any age or condition whatsoever, imported or otherwise brought into this
Province, from any part of the world, shall pay such additional duties
as is hereafter named, that is to say:--that every merchant or other
person whatsoever, who shall, eighteen months after the ratification of
this Act, import any negro slave as aforesaid, shall, for every such
slave, pay unto the public receiver for the time being, at the time of
each importation, over and above all the duties already charged on
negroes, by any law in force in this Province, the additional sum of
forty pounds current money of this Province," etc.

Â§ 4. This section on duties to be in force for four years after
ratification, and thence to the end of the next session of the General
Assembly. Cooper, _Statutes_, VII. 368.


~1718, Feb. 22. Pennsylvania: Duty Act.~

"An Act for continuing a duty on Negroes brought into this province."
Carey and Bioren, _Laws_, I. 118.


~1719, March 20. South Carolina: Â£10 Duty Act.~

"An Act for laying an Imposition on Negroes, Liquors, and other Goods
and Merchandizes, imported, and exported out of this Province, for the
raising of a Fund of Money towards the defraying the Publick Charges and
Expences of this Government; as also to Repeal several Duty Acts, and
Clauses and Paragraphs of Acts, as is herein mentioned." This repeals
former duty acts (e.g. that of 1714), and lays a duty of Â£10 on African
slaves, and Â£30 on American slaves. Cooper, _Statutes_, III. 56.


~1721, Sept. 21. South Carolina: Â£10 Duty Act.~

"An Act for granting to His Majesty a Duty and Imposition on Negroes,
Liquors, and other Goods and Merchandize, imported into and exported out
of this Province." This was a continuation of the Act of 1719. _Ibid._,
III. 159.


~1722, Feb. 23. South Carolina: Â£10 Duty Act.~

"An Act for Granting to His Majesty a Duty and Imposition on Negroes,
Liquors, and other Goods and Merchandizes, for the use of the Publick
of this Province."

Â§ 1. " ... on all negro slaves imported from Africa directly, or any
other place whatsoever, Spanish negroes excepted, if above ten years of
age, ten pounds; on all negroes under ten years of age, (sucking
children excepted) five pounds," etc.

Â§ 3. "And whereas, it has proved to the detriment of some of the
inhabitants of this Province, who have purchased negroes imported here
from the Colonies of America, that they were either transported thence
by the Courts of justice, or sent off by private persons for their ill
behaviour and misdemeanours, to prevent which for the future,

"_Be it enacted_ by the authority aforesaid, That all negroes imported
in this Province from any part of America, after the ratification of
this Act, above ten years of age, shall pay unto the Publick Receiver as
a duty, the sum of fifty pounds, and all such negroes under the age of
ten years, (sucking children excepted) the sum of five pounds of like
current money, unless the owner or agent shall produce a testimonial
under the hand and seal of any Notary Publick of the Colonies or
plantations from whence such negroes came last, before whom it was
proved upon oath, that the same are new negroes, and have not been six
months on shoar in any part of America," etc.

Â§ 4. "And whereas, the importation of Spanish Indians, mustees, negroes,
and mulattoes, may be of dangerous consequence by inticing the slaves
belonging to the inhabitants of this Province to desert with them to the
Spanish settlements near us,

"_Be it therefore enacted_ That all such Spanish negroes, Indians,
mustees, or mulattoes, so imported into this Province, shall pay unto
the Publick Receiver, for the use of this Province, a duty of one
hundred and fifty pounds, current money of this Province."

Â§ 19. Rebate of three-fourths of the duty allowed in case of
re-exportation in six months.

Â§ 31. Act of 1721 repealed.

Â§ 36. This act to continue in force for three years, and thence to the
end of the next session of the General Assembly, and no longer. Cooper,
_Statutes_, III. 193.


~1722, May 12. Pennsylvania: Duty Act.~

"An Act for laying a duty on Negroes imported into this province." Carey
and Bioren, _Laws_, I. 165.


~1723, May. Virginia: Duty Act.~

"An Act for laying a Duty on Liquors and Slaves." Title only; repealed
by proclamation Oct. 27, 1724. Hening, _Statutes_, IV. 118.


~1723, June 18. Rhode Island: Back Duties Collected.~

Resolve appointing the attorney-general to collect back duties on
Negroes. _Colonial Records_, IV. 330.


~1726, March 5. Pennsylvania: Â£10 Duty Act.~

"An Act for the better regulating of Negroes in this province." Carey
and Bioren, _Laws_, I. 214; Bettle, _Notices of Negro Slavery_, in
_Penn. Hist. Soc. Mem._ (1864), I. 388.


~1726, March 5. Pennsylvania: Duty Act.~

"An Act for laying a duty on Negroes imported into this province." Carey
and Bioren, _Laws_, I. 213.


~1727, February. Virginia: Prohibitive Duty Act (?).~

"An Act for laying a Duty on Slaves imported; and for appointing a
Treasurer." Title only found; the duty was probably prohibitive; it was
enacted with a suspending clause, and was not assented to by the king.
Hening, _Statutes_, IV. 182.


~1728, Aug. 31. New York: Â£2 and Â£4 Duty Act.~

"An Act to repeal some Parts and to continue and enforce other Parts of
the Act therein mentioned, and for granting several Duties to His
Majesty, for supporting His Government in the Colony of New York" from
Sept. 1, 1728, to Sept. 1, 1733. Same duty continued by Act of 1732.
_Laws of New York, 1691-1773_, pp. 148, 171; _Doc. rel. Col. Hist. New
York_, VI. 32, 33, 34, 37, 38.


~1728, Sept. 14. Massachusetts: Act of 1705 Strengthened.~

"An Act more effectually to secure the Duty on the Importation of
Negroes." For seven years; substantially the same law re-enacted Jan.
26, 1738, for ten years. _Mass. Province Laws, 1728-9_, ch. 16;
_1738-9_, ch. 27.


~1729, May 10. Pennsylvania: 40s. Duty Act.~

"An Act for laying a Duty on Negroes imported into this Province." _Laws
of Pennsylvania_ (ed. 1742), p. 354, ch. 287.


~1732, May. Rhode Island: Repeal of Act of 1712.~

"Whereas, there was an act made and passed by the General Assembly, at
their session, held at Newport, the 27th day of February, 1711 [O.S.,
N.S. = 1712], entitled 'An Act for laying a duty on negro slaves that
shall be imported into this colony,' and this Assembly being directed by
His Majesty's instructions to repeal the same;--

"Therefore, be it enacted by the General Assembly ... that the said act
... be, and it is hereby repealed, made null and void, and of none
effect for the future." If this is the act mentioned under Act of 1708,
the title is wrongly cited; if not, the act is lost. _Colonial Records_,
IV. 471.


~1732, May. Virginia: Five per cent Duty Act.~

"An Act for laying a Duty upon Slaves, to be paid by the Buyers." For
four years; continued and slightly amended by Acts of 1734, 1736, 1738,
1742, and 1745; revived February, 1752, and continued by Acts of
November, 1753, February, 1759, November, 1766, and 1769; revived (or
continued?) by Act of February, 1772, until 1778. Hening, _Statutes_,
IV. 317, 394, 469; V. 28, 160, 318; VI. 217, 353; VII. 281; VIII. 190,
336, 530.


~1734, November. New York: Duty Act.~

"An act to lay a duty on Negroes & a tax on the Slaves therein mentioned
during the time and for the uses within mentioned." The tax was 1_s._
yearly per slave. _Doc. rel. Col. Hist. New York_, VI. 38.


~1734, Nov. 28. New York: Â£2 and Â£4 (?) Duty Act.~

"An Act to lay a Duty on the Goods, and a Tax on the Slaves therein
mentioned, during the Time, and for the Uses mentioned in the same."
Possibly there were two acts this year. _Laws of New York, 1691-1773_,
p. 186; _Doc. rel. Col. Hist. New York_, VI. 27.


~1735. Georgia: Prohibitive Act.~

An "act for rendering the colony of Georgia more defensible by
prohibiting the importation and use of black slaves or negroes into the
same." W.B. Stevens, _History of Georgia_, I. 311; [B. Martyn], _Account
of the Progress of Georgia_ (1741), pp. 9-10; Prince Hoare, _Memoirs of
Granville Sharp_ (London, 1820), p. 157.


~1740, April 5. South Carolina: Â£100 Prohibitive Duty Act.~

"An Act for the better strengthening of this Province, by granting to
His Majesty certain taxes and impositions on the purchasers of Negroes
imported," etc. The duty on slaves from America was Â£150. Continued to
1744. Cooper, _Statutes_, III. 556. Cf. _Abstract Evidence on
Slave-Trade before Committee of House of Commons, 1790-91_ (London,
1791), p. 150.


~1740, May. Virginia: Additional Five per cent Duty Act.~

"An Act, for laying an additional Duty upon Slaves, to be paid by the
Buyer, for encouraging persons to enlist in his Majesty's service: And
for preventing desertion." To continue until July 1, 1744. Hening,
_Statutes_, V. 92.


~1751, June 14. South Carolina: White Servants Encouraged.~

"An Act for the better strengthening of this Province, by granting to
His Majesty certain Taxes and Impositions on the purchasers of Negroes
and other slaves imported, and for appropriating the same to the uses
therein mentioned, and for granting to His Majesty a duty on Liquors and
other Goods and Merchandize, for the uses therein mentioned, and for
exempting the purchasers of Negroes and other slaves imported from
payment of the Tax, and the Liquors and other Goods and Merchandize from
the duties imposed by any former Act or Acts of the General Assembly of
this Province."

"Whereas, the best way to prevent the mischiefs that may be attended by
the great importation of negroes into this Province, will be to
establish a method by which such importation should be made a necessary
means of introducing a proportionable number of white inhabitants into
the same; therefore for the effectual raising and appropriating a fund
sufficient for the better settling of this Province with white
inhabitants, we, his Majesty's most dutiful and loyal subjects, the
House of Assembly now met in General Assembly, do cheerfully give and
grant unto the King's most excellent Majesty, his heirs and successors,
the several taxes and impositions hereinafter mentioned, for the uses
and to be raised, appropriated, paid and applied as is hereinafter
directed and appointed, and not otherwise, and do humbly pray his most
sacred Majesty that it may be enacted,

Â§ 1. "_And be it enacted_, by his Excellency James Glen, Esquire,
Governor in chief and Captain General in and over the Province of South
Carolina, by and with the advice and consent of his Majesty's honorable
Council, and the House of Assembly of the said Province, and by the
authority of the same, That from and immediately after the passing of
this Act, there shall be imposed on and paid by all and every the
inhabitants of this Province, and other person and persons whosoever,
first purchasing any negro or other slave, hereafter to be imported, a
certain tax or sum of ten pounds current money for every such negro and
other slave of the height of four feet two inches and upwards; and for
every one under that height, and above three feet two inches, the sum of
five pounds like money; and for all under three feet two inches,
(sucking children excepted) two pounds and ten shillings like money,
which every such inhabitant of this Province, and other person and
persons whosoever shall so purchase or buy as aforesaid, which said sums
of ten pounds and five pounds and two pounds and ten shillings
respectively, shall be paid by such purchaser for every such slave, at
the time of his, her or their purchasing of the same, to the public
treasurer of this Province for the time being, for the uses hereinafter
mentioned, set down and appointed, under pain of forfeiting all and
every such negroes and slaves, for which the said taxes or impositions
shall not be paid, pursuant to the directions of this Act, to be sued
for, recovered and applied in the manner hereinafter directed."

Â§ 6. "_And be it further enacted_ by the authority aforesaid, That the
said tax hereby imposed on negroes and other slaves, paid or to be paid
by or on the behalf of the purchasers as aforesaid, by virtue of this
Act, shall be applied and appropriated as followeth, and to no other
use, or in any other manner whatever, (that is to say) that three-fifth
parts (the whole into five equal parts to be divided) of the net sum
arising by the said tax, for and during the term of five years from the
time of passing this Act, be applied and the same is hereby applied for
payment of the sum of six pounds proclamation money to every poor
foreign protestant whatever from Europe, or other poor protestant (his
Majesty's subject) who shall produce a certificate under the seal of any
corporation, or a certificate under the hands of the minister and
church-wardens of any parish, or the minister and elders of any church,
meeting or congregation in Great Britain or Ireland, of the good
character of such poor protestant, above the age of twelve and under the
age of fifty years, and for payment of the sum of three pounds like
money, to every such poor protestant under the age of twelve and above
the age of two years; who shall come into this Province within the first
three years of the said term of five years, and settle on any part of
the southern frontier lying between Pon Pon and Savannah rivers, or in
the central parts of this Province," etc. For the last two years the
bounty is Â£4 and Â£2.

Â§ 7. After the expiration of this term of five years, the sum is
appropriated to the protestants settling anywhere in the State, and the
bounty is Â£2 13_s._ 4_d._, and Â£1 6_s._ 8_d._

Â§ 8. One other fifth of the tax is appropriated to survey lands, and the
remaining fifth as a bounty for ship-building, and for encouraging the
settlement of ship-builders.

Â§ 14. Rebate of three-fourths of the tax allowed in case of
re-exportation of the slaves in six months.

Â§ 16. "_And be it further enacted_ by the authority aforesaid, That
every person or persons who after the passing this Act shall purchase
any slave or slaves which shall be brought or imported into this
Province, either by land or water, from any of his Majesty's plantations
or colonies in America, that have been in any such colony or plantation
for the space of six months; and if such slave or slaves have not been
so long in such colony or plantation, the importer shall be obliged to
make oath or produce a proper certificate thereof, or otherwise every
such importer shall pay a further tax or imposition of fifty pounds,
over and besides the tax hereby imposed for every such slave which he or
they shall purchase as aforesaid." Actual settlers bringing slaves are
excepted.

Â§ 41. This act to continue in force ten years from its passage, and
thence to the end of the next session of the General Assembly, and no
longer. Cooper, _Statutes_, III. 739.


~1753, Dec. 12. New York: 5 oz. and 10 oz. plate Duty Act.~

"An Act for granting to His Majesty the several Duties and Impositions,
on Goods, Wares and Merchandizes imported into this Colony, therein
mentioned." Annually continued until 1767, or perhaps until 1774. _Laws
of New York, 1752-62_, p. 21, ch. xxvii.; _Doc. rel. Col. Hist. New
York_, VII. 907; VIII. 452.


~1754, February. Virginia: Additional Five per cent Duty Act.~

"An Act for the encouragement and protection of the settlers upon the
waters of the Mississippi." For three years; continued in 1755 and 1763;
revived in 1772, and continued until 1778. Hening, _Statutes_, VI. 417,
468; VII. 639; VIII. 530.


~1754, July 25. Maryland: Additional 10s. Duty Act.~

"An Act for his Majesty's Service." Bacon, _Laws_, 1754, ch. ix.


~1755, May. Virginia: Additional Ten per cent Duty Act.~

"An act to explain an act, intituled, An act for raising the sum of
twenty thousand pounds, for the protection of his majesty's subjects,
against the insults and encroachments of the French; and for other
purposes therein mentioned."

Â§ 10. " ... from and after the passing of this act, there shall be
levied and paid to our sovereign lord the king, his heirs and
successors, for all slaves imported, or brought into this colony and
dominion for sale, either by land or water, from any part [port] or
place whatsoever, by the buyer, or purchaser, after the rate of ten per
centum, on the amount of each respective purchase, over and above the
several duties already laid on slaves, imported as aforesaid, by an act
or acts of Assembly, now subsisting, and also over and above the duty
laid by" the Act of 1754. Repealed by Act of May, 1760, Â§ 11, " ...
inasmuch as the same prevents the importation of slaves, and thereby
lessens the fund arising from the duties upon slaves." Hening,
_Statutes_, VI. 461; VII. 363. Cf. _Dinwiddie Papers_, II. 86.


~1756, March 22. Maryland: Additional 20s. Duty Act.~

"An Act for granting a Supply of Forty Thousand Pounds, for his
Majesty's Service," etc. For five years. Bacon, _Laws_, 1756, ch. v.


~1757, April. Virginia: Additional Ten per cent Duty Act.~

"An Act for granting an aid to his majesty for the better protection of
this colony, and for other purposes therein mentioned."

Â§ 22. " ... from and after the ninth day of July, one thousand seven
hundred and fifty-eight, during the term of seven years, there shall be
paid for all slaves imported into this colony, for sale, either by land
or water, from any port or place whatsoever, by the buyer or purchaser
thereof, after the rate of ten per centum on the amount of each
respective purchase, over and above the several duties already laid upon
slaves imported, as aforesaid, by any act or acts of Assembly now
subsisting in this colony," etc. Repealed by Act of March, 1761, Â§ 6, as
being "found very inconvenient." Hening, _Statutes_, VII. 69, 383.


~1759, November. Virginia: Twenty per cent Duty Act.~

"An Act to oblige the persons bringing slaves into this colony from
Maryland, Carolina, and the West-Indies, for their own use, to pay a
duty."

Â§ 1. " ... from and after the passing of this act, there shall be paid
... for all slaves imported or brought into this colony and dominion
from Maryland, North-Carolina, or any other place in America, by the
owner or importer thereof, after the rate of twenty per centum on the
amount of each respective purchase," etc. This act to continue until
April 20, 1767; continued in 1766 and 1769, until 1773; altered by Act
of 1772, _q.v. Ibid._, VII. 338; VIII. 191, 336.


~1760. South Carolina: Total Prohibition.~

Text not found; act disallowed by Great Britain. Cf. Burge,
_Commentaries_, I. 737, note; W.B. Stevens, _History of Georgia_, I.
286.


~1761, March 14. Pennsylvania: Â£10 Duty Act.~

"An Act for laying a duty on Negroes and Mulattoe slaves, imported into
this province." Continued in 1768; repealed (or disallowed) in 1780.
Carey and Bioren, _Laws_, I. 371, 451; _Acts of Assembly_ (ed. 1782), p.
149; _Colonial Records_ (1852), VIII. 576.


~1761, April 22. Pennsylvania: Prohibitive Duty Act.~

"A Supplement to an act, entituled An Act for laying a duty on Negroes
and Mulattoe slaves, imported into this province." Continued in 1768.
Carey and Bioren, _Laws_, I. 371, 451; Bettle, _Notices of Negro
Slavery_, in _Penn. Hist. Soc. Mem._ (1864), I. 388-9.


~1763, Nov. 26. Maryland: Additional Â£2 Duty Act.~

"An Act for imposing an additional Duty of Two Pounds per Poll on all
Negroes Imported into this Province."

Â§ 1. All persons importing Negroes by land or water into this province,
shall at the time of entry pay to the naval officer the sum of two
pounds, current money, over and above the duties now payable by law, for
every Negro so imported or brought in, on forfeiture of Â£10 current
money for every Negro so brought in and not paid for. One half of the
penalty is to go to the informer, the other half to the use of the
county schools. The duty shall be collected, accounted for, and paid by
the naval officers, in the same manner as former duties on Negroes.

Â§ 2. But persons removing from any other of his Majesty's dominions in
order to settle and reside within this province, may import their slaves
for carrying on their proper occupations at the time of removal, duty
free.

Â§ 3. Importers of Negroes, exporting the same within two months of the
time of their importation, on application to the naval officer shall be
paid the aforesaid duty. Bacon, _Laws_, 1763, ch. xxviii.


~1763 (circa). New Jersey: Prohibitive Duty Act.~

"An Act for laying a duty on Negroes and Mulatto Slaves Imported into
this Province." Disallowed (?) by Great Britain. _N.J. Archives_, IX.
345-6, 383, 447, 458.


~1764, Aug. 25. South Carolina: Additional Â£100 Duty Act.~

"An Act for laying an additional duty upon all Negroes hereafter to be
imported into this Province, for the time therein mentioned, to be paid
by the first purchasers of such Negroes." Cooper, _Statutes_, IV 187.


~1766, November. Virginia: Proposed Duty Act.~

"An act for laying an additional duty upon slaves imported into this
colony."

Â§ 1. " ... from and after the passing of this act there shall be levied
and paid ... for all slaves imported or brought into this colony for
sale, either by land or water from any port or place whatsoever, by the
buyer or purchaser, after the rate of ten per centum on the amount of
each respective purchase over and above the several duties already laid
upon slaves imported or brought into this colony as aforesaid," etc. To
be suspended until the king's consent is given, and then to continue
seven years. The same act was passed again in 1769. Hening, _Statutes_,
VIII. 237, 337.


~1766. Rhode Island: Restrictive Measure (?).~

Title and text not found. Cf. _Digest_ of 1798, under "Slave Trade;"
_Public Laws of Rhode Island_ (revision of 1822), p. 441.


~1768, Feb. 20. Pennsylvania: Re-enactment of Acts of 1761.~

Titles only found. Dallas, _Laws_, I. 490; _Colonial Records_ (1852),
IX. 472, 637, 641.


~1769, Nov. 16. New Jersey: Â£15 Duty Act.~

"An Act for laying a Duty on the Purchasers of Slaves imported into this
Colony."

"Whereas Duties on the Importation of Negroes in several of the
neighbouring Colonies hath, on Experience, been found beneficial in the
Introduction of sober, industrious Foreigners, to settle under His
Majesty's Allegiance, and the promoting a Spirit of Industry among the
Inhabitants in general: _In order therefore_ to promote the same good
Designs in this Government, and that such as choose to purchase Slaves
may contribute some equitable Proportion of the publick Burdens," etc.
A duty of "_Fifteen Pounds_, Proclamation Money, is laid." _Acts of
Assembly_ (Allinson, 1776), p. 315.


~1769 (circa). Connecticut: Importation Prohibited (?).~

Title and text not found. "Whereas, the increase of slaves is injurious
to the poor, and inconvenient, therefore," etc. Fowler, _Historical
Status of the Negro in Connecticut_, in _Local Law_, etc., p. 125.


~1770. Rhode Island: Bill to Prohibit Importation.~

Bill to prohibit importation of slaves fails. Arnold, _History of Rhode
Island_ (1859), II. 304, 321, 337.


~1771, April 12. Massachusetts: Bill to Prevent Importation.~

Bill passes both houses and fails of Governor Hutchinson's assent.
_House Journal_, pp. 211, 215, 219, 228, 234, 236, 240, 242-3.


~1771. Maryland: Additional Â£5 Duty Act.~

"An Act for imposing a further additional duty of five pounds current
money per poll on all negroes imported into this province." For seven
years. _Laws of Maryland since 1763_: 1771, ch. vii.; cf. 1773, sess.
Nov.-Dec., ch. xiv.


~1772, April 1. Virginia: Address to the King.~

" ... The importation of slaves into the colonies from the coast of
Africa hath long been considered as a trade of great inhumanity, and
under its _present encouragement_, we have too much reason to fear _will
endanger the very existence_ of your majesty's American dominions....

"Deeply impressed with these sentiments, we most humbly beseech your
majesty to _remove all those restraints_ on your majesty's governors of
this colony, _which inhibit their assenting to such laws as might check
so very pernicious a commerce_." _Journals of the House of Burgesses_,
p. 131; quoted in Tucker, _Dissertation on Slavery_ (repr. 1861), p. 43.


~1773, Feb. 26. Pennsylvania: Additional Â£10 Duty Act.~

"An Act for making perpetual the act ... [of 1761] ... and laying an
additional duty on the said slaves." Dallas, _Laws_, I. 671; _Acts of
Assembly_ (ed. 1782), p. 149.


~1774, March, June. Massachusetts: Bills to Prohibit Importation.~

Two bills designed to prohibit the importation of slaves fail of the
governor's assent. First bill: _General Court Records_, XXX. 248, 264;
_Mass. Archives, Domestic Relations, 1643-1774_, IX. 457. Second bill:
_General Court Records_, XXX. 308, 322.


~1774, June. Rhode Island: Importation Restricted.~

"An Act prohibiting the importation of Negroes into this Colony."

"Whereas, the inhabitants of America are generally engaged in the
preservation of their own rights and liberties, among which, that of
personal freedom must be considered as the greatest; as those who are
desirous of enjoying all the advantages of liberty themselves, should be
willing to extend personal liberty to others;--

"Therefore, be it enacted ... that for the future, no negro or mulatto
slave shall be brought into this colony; and in case any slave shall
hereafter be brought in, he or she shall be, and are hereby, rendered
immediately free, so far as respects personal freedom, and the enjoyment
of private property, in the same manner as the native Indians."

"Provided that the slaves of settlers and travellers be excepted.

"Provided, also, that nothing in this act shall extend, or be deemed to
extend, to any negro or mulatto slave brought from the coast of Africa,
into the West Indies, on board any vessel belonging to this colony, and
which negro or mulatto slave could not be disposed of in the West
Indies, but shall be brought into this colony.

"Provided, that the owner of such negro or mulatto slave give bond to
the general treasurer of the said colony, within ten days after such
arrival in the sum of Â£100, lawful money, for each and every such negro
or mulatto slave so brought in, that such negro or mulatto slave shall
be exported out of the colony, within one year from the date of such
bond; if such negro or mulatto be alive, and in a condition to be
removed."

"Provided, also, that nothing in this act shall extend, or be deemed to
extend, to any negro or mulatto slave that may be on board any vessel
belonging to this colony, now at sea, in her present voyage." Heavy
penalties are laid for bringing in Negroes in order to free them.
_Colonial Records_, VII. 251-3.

[1784, February: "It is voted and resolved, that the whole of the clause
contained in an act of this Assembly, passed at June session,
A.D. 1774, permitting slaves brought from the coast of Africa
into the West Indies, on board any vessel belonging to this (then
colony, now) state, and who could not be disposed of in the West Indies,
&c., be, and the same is, hereby repealed." _Colonial Records_, X. 8.]


~1774, October. Connecticut: Importation Prohibited.~

"An Act for prohibiting the Importation of Indian, Negro or Molatto
Slaves."

" ... no indian, negro or molatto Slave shall at any time hereafter be
brought or imported into this Colony, by sea or land, from any place or
places whatsoever, to be disposed of, left or sold within this Colony."
This was re-enacted in the revision of 1784, and slaves born after 1784
were ordered to be emancipated at the age of twenty-five. _Colonial
Records_, XIV. 329; _Acts and Laws of Connecticut_ (ed. 1784), pp.
233-4.


~1774. New Jersey: Proposed Prohibitive Duty.~

"A Bill for laying a Duty on Indian, Negroe and Molatto Slaves, imported
into this Colony." Passed the Assembly, and was rejected by the Council
as "plainly" intending "an intire Prohibition," etc. _N.J. Archives_,
1st Series, VI. 222.


~1775, March 27. Delaware: Bill to Prohibit Importation.~

Passed the Assembly and was vetoed by the governor. Force, _American
Archives_, 4th Series, II. 128-9.


~1775, Nov. 23. Virginia: On Lord Dunmore's Proclamation.~

Williamsburg Convention to the public: "Our Assemblies have repeatedly
passed acts, laying heavy duties upon imported Negroes, by which they
meant altogether to prevent the horrid traffick; but their humane
intentions have been as often frustrated by the cruelty and covetousness
of a set of _English_ merchants." ... The Americans would, if possible,
"not only prevent any more Negroes from losing their freedom, but
restore it to such as have already unhappily lost it." This is evidently
addressed in part to Negroes, to keep them from joining the British.
_Ibid._, III. 1387.


~1776, June 29. Virginia: Preamble to Frame of Government.~

Blame for the slave-trade thrown on the king. See above, page 21.
Hening, _Statutes_, IX. 112-3.


~1776, Aug.-Sept. Delaware: Constitution.~

"The Constitution or system of Government agreed to and resolved upon by
the Representatives in full Convention of the Delaware State," etc.

Â§ 26. "No person hereafter imported into this State from _Africa_ ought
to be held in slavery on any pretence whatever; and no Negro, Indian, or
Mulatto slave ought to be brought into this State, for sale, from any
part of the world." Force, _American Archives_, 5th Series, I. 1174-9.


~1777, July 2. Vermont: Slavery Condemned.~

The first Constitution declares slavery a violation of "natural,
inherent and unalienable rights." _Vermont State Papers, 1779-86_, p.
244.


~1777. Maryland: Negro Duty Maintained.~

"An Act concerning duties."

" ... no duties imposed by act of assembly on any article or thing
imported into or exported out of this state (except duties imposed on
the importation of negroes), shall be taken or received within two years
from the end of the present session of the general assembly." _Laws of
Maryland since 1763_: 1777, sess. Feb.-Apr., ch. xviii.


~1778, Sept. 7. Pennsylvania: Act to Collect Back Duties.~

"An Act for the recovery of the duties on Negroes and Mulattoe slaves,
which on the fourth day of July, one thousand seven hundred and
seventy-six, were due to this state," etc. Dallas, _Laws_, I. 782.


~1778, October. Virginia: Importation Prohibited.~

"An act for preventing the farther importation of Slaves.

Â§ 1. "For preventing the farther importation of slaves into this
commonwealth, _Be it enacted by the General Assembly_, That from and
after the passing of this act no slave or slaves shall hereafter be
imported into this commonwealth by sea or land, nor shall any slaves so
imported be sold or bought by any person whatsoever.

Â§ 2. "Every person hereafter importing slaves into this commonwealth
contrary to this act shall forfeit and pay the sum of one thousand
pounds for every slave so imported, and every person selling or buying
any such slaves shall in like manner forfeit and pay the sum of five
hundred pounds for every slave so sold or bought," etc.

Â§ 3. "_And be it farther enacted_, That every slave imported into this
commonwealth, contrary to the true intent and meaning of this act,
shall, upon such importation become free."

Â§ 4. Exceptions are _bona fide_ settlers with slaves not imported later
than Nov. 1, 1778, nor intended to be sold; and transient travellers.
Re-enacted in substance in the revision of October, 1785. For a
temporary exception to this act, as concerns citizens of Georgia and
South Carolina during the war, see Act of May, 1780. Hening, _Statutes_,
IX. 471; X. 307; XII. 182.


~1779, October. Rhode Island: Slave-Trade Restricted.~

"An Act prohibiting slaves being sold out of the state, against their
consent." Title only found. _Colonial Records_, VIII. 618; Arnold,
_History of Rhode Island_, II. 449.


~1779. Vermont: Importation Prohibited.~

"An Act for securing the general privileges of the people," etc. The act
abolished slavery. _Vermont State Papers, 1779-86_, p. 287.


~1780. Massachusetts: Slavery Abolished.~

Passage in the Constitution which was held by the courts to abolish
slavery: "Art. I. All men are born free and equal, and have certain,
natural, essential, and unalienable rights; among which may be reckoned
the right of enjoying and defending their lives and liberties," etc.
_Constitution of Massachusetts_, Part I., Art. 1; prefixed to _Perpetual
Laws_ (1789).


~1780, March 1. Pennsylvania: Slavery Abolished.~

"An Act for the gradual abolition of slavery."

Â§ 5. All slaves to be registered before Nov. 1.

Â§ 10. None but slaves "registered as aforesaid, shall, at any time
hereafter, be deemed, adjudged, or holden, within the territories of
this commonwealth, as slaves or servants for life, but as free men and
free women; except the domestic slaves attending upon Delegates in
Congress from the other American States," and those of travellers not
remaining over six months, foreign ministers, etc., "provided such
domestic slaves be not aliened or sold to any inhabitant," etc.

Â§ 11. Fugitive slaves from other states may be taken back.

Â§ 14. Former duty acts, etc., repealed. Dallas, _Laws_, I. 838. Cf.
_Penn. Archives_, VII. 79; VIII. 720.


~1783, April. Confederation: Slave-Trade in Treaty of 1783.~

"To the earnest wish of Jay that British ships should have no right
under the convention to carry into the states any slaves from any part
of the world, it being the intention of the United States entirely to
prohibit their importation, Fox answered promptly: 'If that be their
policy, it never can be competent to us to dispute with them their own
regulations.'" Fox to Hartley, June 10, 1783, in Bancroft, _History of
the Constitution_, I. 61. Cf. Sparks, _Diplomatic Correspondence_, X.
154, June, 1783.


~1783. Maryland: Importation Prohibited.~

"An Act to prohibit the bringing slaves into this state."

" ... it shall not be lawful, after the passing this act, to import or
bring into this state, by land or water, any negro, mulatto, or other
slave, for sale, or to reside within this state; and any person brought
into this state as a slave contrary to this act, if a slave before,
shall thereupon immediately cease to be a slave, and shall be free;
provided that this act shall not prohibit any person, being a citizen of
some one of the United States, coming into this state, with a _bona
fide_ intention of settling therein, and who shall actually reside
within this state for one year at least, ... to import or bring in any
slave or slaves which before belonged to such person, and which slave or
slaves had been an inhabitant of some one of the United States, for the
space of three whole years next preceding such importation," etc. _Laws
of Maryland since 1763_: 1783, sess. April--June, ch. xxiii.


~1783, Aug. 13. South Carolina: Â£3 and Â£20 Duty Act.~

"An Act for levying and collecting certain duties and imposts therein
mentioned, in aid of the public revenue." Cooper, _Statutes_, IV. 576.


~1784, February. Rhode Island: Manumission.~

"An Act authorizing the manumission of negroes, mulattoes, and others,
and for the gradual abolition of slavery." Persons born after March,
1784, to be free. Bill framed pursuant to a petition of Quakers.
_Colonial Records_, X. 7-8; Arnold, _History of Rhode Island_, II. 503.


~1784, March 26. South Carolina: Â£3 and Â£5 Duty Act.~

"An Act for levying and collecting certain Duties," etc. Cooper,
_Statutes_, IV. 607.


~1785, April 12. New York: Partial Prohibition.~

"An Act granting a bounty on hemp to be raised within this State, and
imposing an additional duty on sundry articles of merchandise, and for
other purposes therein mentioned."

" ... _And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid_, That if
any negro or other person to be imported or brought into this State from
any of the United States or from any other place or country after the
first day of June next, shall be sold as a slave or slaves within this
State, the seller or his or her factor or agent, shall be deemed guilty
of a public offence, and shall for every such offence forfeit the sum of
one hundred pounds lawful money of New York, to be recovered by any
person," etc.

"_And be it further enacted_ ... That every such person imported or
brought into this State and sold contrary to the true intent and meaning
of this act shall be freed." _Laws of New York, 1785-88_ (ed. 1886), pp.
120-21.


~1785. Rhode Island: Restrictive Measure (?).~

Title and text not found. Cf. _Public Laws of Rhode Island_ (revision of
1822), p. 441.


~1786, March 2. New Jersey: Importation Prohibited.~

"An Act to prevent the importation of Slaves into the State of New
Jersey, and to authorize the Manumission of them under certain
restrictions, and to prevent the Abuse of Slaves."

"Whereas the Principles of Justice and Humanity require that the
barbarous Custom of bringing the unoffending African from his native
Country and Connections into a State of Slavery ought to be
discountenanced, and as soon as possible prevented; and sound Policy
also requires, in order to afford ample Support to such of the Community
as depend upon their Labour for their daily Subsistence, that the
Importation of Slaves into this State from any other State or Country
whatsoever, ought to be prohibited under certain Restrictions; and that
such as are under Servitude in the State ought to be protected by Law
from those Exercises of Wanton Cruelty too often practiced upon them;
and that every unnecessary Obstruction in the Way of freeing Slaves
should be removed; therefore,

Â§ 1. "_Be it Enacted by the Council and General Assembly of this State,
and it is hereby Enacted by the Authority of the same_, That from and
after the Publication of this Act, it shall not be lawful for any Person
or Persons whatsoever to bring into this State, either for Sale or for
Servitude, any Negro Slave brought from Africa since the Year Seventeen
Hundred and Seventy-six; and every Person offending by bringing into
this State any such Negro Slave shall, for each Slave, forfeit and Pay
the Sum of Fifty Pounds, to be sued for and recovered with Costs by the
Collector of the Township into which such Slave shall be brought, to be
applied when recovered to the Use of the State.

Â§ 2. "_And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid_, That if
any Person shall either bring or procure to be brought into this State,
any Negro or Mulatto Slave, who shall not have been born in or brought
from Africa since the Year above mentioned, and either sell or buy, or
cause such Negro or Mulatto Slave to be sold or remain in this State,
for the Space of six Months, every such Person so bringing or procuring
to be brought or selling or purchasing such Slave, not born in or
brought from Africa since the Year aforesaid, shall for every such
Slave, forfeit and pay the Sum of Twenty Pounds, to be sued for and
recovered with Costs by the Collector of the Township into which such
Slave shall be brought or remain after the Time limited for that
Purpose, the Forfeiture to be applied to the Use of the State as
aforesaid.

Â§ 3. "_Provided always, and be it further Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid_, That Nothing in this Act contained shall be construed to
prevent any Person who shall remove into the State, to take a settled
Residence here, from bringing all his or her Slaves without incurring
the Penalties aforesaid, excepting such Slaves as shall have been
brought from Africa since the Year first above mentioned, or to prevent
any Foreigners or others having only a temporary Residence in this
State, for the Purpose of transacting any particular Business, or on
their Travels, from bringing and employing such Slaves as Servants,
during the Time of his or her Stay here, provided such Slaves shall not
be sold or disposed of in this State." _Acts of the Tenth General
Assembly_ (Tower Collection of Laws).


~1786, Oct. 30. Vermont: External Trade Prohibited.~

"An act to prevent the sale and transportation of Negroes and Molattoes
out of this State." Â£100 penalty. _Statutes of Vermont_ (ed. 1787), p.
105.


~1786. North Carolina: Prohibitive Duty.~

"An act to impose a duty on all slaves brought into this state by land
or water."

"Whereas the importation of slaves into this state is productive of evil
consequences, and highly impolitic," etc. A prohibitive duty is imposed.
The exact text was not found.

Â§ 6. Slaves introduced from States which have passed emancipation acts
are to be returned in three months; if not, a bond of Â£50 is to be
forfeited, and a fine of Â£100 imposed.

Â§ 8. Act to take effect next Feb. 1; repealed by Act of 1790, ch. 18.
Martin, _Iredell's Acts of Assembly_, I. 413, 492.


~1787, Feb. 3. Delaware: Exportation Prohibited.~

"An Act to prevent the exportation of slaves, and for other purposes."
_Laws of Delaware_ (ed. 1797), p. 884, ch. 145 b.


~1787, March 28. South Carolina: Total Prohibition.~

"An Act to regulate the recovery and payment of debts and for
prohibiting the importation of negroes for the time therein mentioned."
Title only given. GrimkÃ©, _Public Laws_, p. lxviii, No. 1485.


~1787, March 28. South Carolina: Importation Prohibited.~

"An Ordinance to impose a Penalty on any person who shall import into
this State any Negroes, contrary to the Instalment Act."

1. "_Be it ordained_, by the honorable the Senate and House of
Representatives, met in General Assembly, and by the authority of the
same, That any person importing or bringing into this State a negro
slave, contrary to the Act to regulate the recovery of debts and
prohibiting the importation of negroes, shall, besides the forfeiture of
such negro or slave, be liable to a penalty of one hundred pounds, to
the use of the State, for every such negro or slave so imported and
brought in, in addition to the forfeiture in and by the said Act
prescribed." Cooper, _Statutes_, VII. 430.


~1787, October. Rhode Island: Importation Prohibited.~

"An act to prevent the slave trade and to encourage the abolition of
slavery." This act prohibited and censured trade under penalty of Â£100
for each person and Â£1,000 for each vessel. Bartlett, _Index to the
Printed Acts and Resolves_, p. 333; _Narragansett Historical Register_,
II. 298-9.

                    *       *       *       *       *



APPENDIX B.

A CHRONOLOGICAL CONSPECTUS OF STATE, NATIONAL, AND INTERNATIONAL
LEGISLATION.

1788-1871.


    As the State statutes and Congressional reports and bills are
    difficult to find, the significant parts of such documents are
    printed in full. In the case of national statutes and treaties,
    the texts may easily be found through the references.


~1788, Feb. 22. New York: Slave-Trade Prohibited.~

"An Act concerning slaves."

"Whereas in consequence of the act directing a revision of the laws of
this State, it is expedient that the several existing laws relative to
slaves, should be revised, and comprized in one. Therefore, _Be it
enacted_," etc.

"And to prevent the further importation of slaves into this State, _Be
it further enacted by the authority aforesaid_, That if any person shall
sell as a slave within this State any negro, or other person, who has
been imported or brought into this State, after" June 1, 1785, "such
seller, or his or her factor or agent, making such sale, shall be deemed
guilty of a public offence, and shall for every such offence, forfeit
the sum of one hundred pounds.... _And further_, That every person so
imported ... shall be free." The purchase of slaves for removal to
another State is prohibited under penalty of Â£100. _Laws of New York,
1785-88_ (ed. 1886), pp. 675-6.


~1788, March 25. Massachusetts: Slave-Trade Prohibited.~

"An Act to prevent the Slave-Trade, and for granting Relief to the
Families of such unhappy Persons as may be kidnapped or decoyed away
from this Commonwealth."

"Whereas by the African trade for slaves, the lives and liberties of
many innocent persons have been from time to time sacrificed to the lust
of gain: And whereas some persons residing in this Commonwealth may be
so regardless of the rights of human kind, as to be concerned in that
unrighteous commerce:

Â§ 1. "Be it therefore enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives,
in General Court assembled, and by the authority of the same, That no
citizen of this Commonwealth, or other person residing within the same,
shall for himself, or any other person whatsoever, either as master,
factor, supercargo, owner or hirer, in whole or in part, of any vessel,
directly or indirectly, import or transport, or buy or sell, or receive
on board, his or their vessel, with intent to cause to be imported or
transported, any of the inhabitants of any State or Kingdom, in that
part of the world called _Africa_, as slaves, or as servants for term of
years." Any person convicted of doing this shall forfeit and pay the sum
of Â£50 for every person received on board, and the sum of Â£200 for every
vessel fitted out for the trade, "to be recovered by action of debt, in
any Court within this Commonwealth, proper to try the same; the one
moiety thereof to the use of this Commonwealth, and the other moiety to
the person who shall prosecute for and recover the same."

Â§ 2. All insurance on said vessels and cargo shall be null and void;
"and this act may be given in evidence under the general issue, in any
suit or action commenced for the recovery of insurance so made," etc.

Â§ 4. "_Provided_ ... That this act do not extend to vessels which have
already sailed, their owners, factors, or commanders, for and during
their present voyage, or to any insurance that shall have been made,
previous to the passing of the same." _Perpetual Laws of Massachusetts,
1780-89_ (ed. 1789), p. 235.


~1788, March 29. Pennsylvania: Slave-Trade Prohibited.~

"An Act to explain and amend an act, entituled, 'An Act for the gradual
abolition of slavery.'"

Â§ 2. Slaves brought in by persons intending to settle shall be free.

Â§ 3. " ... no negro or mulatto slave, or servant for term of years,"
except servants of congressmen, consuls, etc., "shall be removed out of
this state, with the design and intention that the place of abode or
residence of such slave or servant shall be thereby altered or changed,
or with the design and intention that such slave or servant, if a
female, and pregnant, shall be detained and kept out of this state till
her delivery of the child of which she is or shall be pregnant, or with
the design and intention that such slave or servant shall be brought
again into this state, after the expiration of six months from the time
of such slave or servant having been first brought into this state,
without his or her consent, if of full age, testified upon a private
examination, before two Justices of the peace of the city or county in
which he or she shall reside, or, being under the age of twenty-one
years, without his or her consent, testified in manner aforesaid, and
also without the consent of his or her parents," etc. Penalty for every
such offence, Â£75.

Â§ 5. " ... if any person or persons shall build, fit, equip, man, or
otherwise prepare any ship or vessel, within any port of this state, or
shall cause any ship or other vessel to sail from any port of this
state, for the purpose of carrying on a trade or traffic in slaves, to,
from, or between Europe, Asia, Africa or America, or any places or
countries whatever, or of transporting slaves to or from one port or
place to another, in any part or parts of the world, such ship or
vessel, her tackle, furniture, apparel, and other appurtenances, shall
be forfeited to the commonwealth.... And, moreover, all and every person
and persons so building, fitting out," etc., shall forfeit Â£1000.
Dallas, _Laws_, II. 586.


~1788, October. Connecticut: Slave-Trade Prohibited.~

"An Act to prevent the Slave-Trade."

_"Be it enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives in General
Court assembled, and by the Authority of the same_, That no Citizen or
Inhabitant of this State, shall for himself, or any other Person, either
as Master, Factor, Supercargo, Owner or Hirer, in Whole, or in Part, of
any Vessel, directly or indirectly, import or transport, or buy or sell,
or receive on board his or her Vessel, with Intent to cause to be
imported or transported, any of the Inhabitants of any Country in
Africa, as Slaves or Servants, for Term of Years; upon Penalty of _Fifty
Pounds_, for every Person so received on board, as aforesaid; and of
_Five Hundred Pounds_ for every such Vessel employed in the Importation
or Transportation aforesaid; to be recovered by Action, Bill, Plaint or
Information; the one Half to the Plaintiff, and the other Half to the
Use of this State." And all insurance on vessels and slaves shall be
void. This act to be given as evidence under general issue, in any suit
commenced for recovery of such insurance.

" ... if any Person shall kidnap ... any free Negro," etc., inhabitant
of this State, he shall forfeit Â£100. Every vessel clearing for the
coast of Africa or any other part of the world, and suspected to be in
the slave-trade, must give bond in Â£1000. Slightly amended in 1789.
_Acts and Laws of Connecticut_ (ed. 1784), pp. 368-9, 388.


~1788, Nov. 4. South Carolina: Temporary Prohibition.~

"An Act to regulate the Payment and Recovery of Debts, and to prohibit
the Importation of Negroes, for the Time therein limited."

Â§ 16. "No negro or other slave shall be imported or brought into this
State either by land or water on or before the first of January, 1793,
under the penalty of forfeiting every such slave or slaves to any person
who will sue or inform for the same; and under further penalty of
paying Â£100 to the use of the State for every such negro or slave so
imported or brought in: _Provided_, That nothing in this prohibition
contained shall extend to such slaves as are now the property of
citizens of the United States, and at the time of passing this act shall
be within the limits of the said United States.

Â§ 17. "All former instalment laws, and an ordinance imposing a penalty
on persons importing negroes into this State, passed the 28th day of
March 1787, are hereby repealed." GrimkÃ©, _Public Laws_, p. 466.


~1789, Feb. 3. Delaware: Slave-Trade Prohibited.~

"_An additional Supplementary_ ACT _to an act, intituled_, An act to
prevent the exportation of slaves, and for other purposes."

"Whereas it is inconsistent with that spirit of general liberty which
pervades the constitution of this state, that vessels should be fitted
out, or equipped, in any of the ports thereof, for the purpose of
receiving and transporting the natives of Africa to places where they
are held in slavery; or that any acts should be deemed lawful, which
tend to encourage or promote such iniquitous traffic among us:

Â§ 1. "_Be it therefore enacted by the General Assembly of Delaware_,
That if any owner or owners, master, agent, or factor, shall fit out,
equip, man, or otherwise prepare, any ship or vessel within any port or
place in this state, or shall cause any ship, or other vessel, to sail
from any port or place in this state, for the purpose of carrying on a
trade or traffic in slaves, to, from, or between, Europe, Asia, Africa,
or America, or any places or countries whatever, or of transporting
slaves to, or from, one port or place to another, in any part or parts
of the world; such ship or vessel, her tackle, furniture, apparel, and
other appurtenances, shall be forfeited to this state.... And moreover,
all and every person and persons so fitting out ... any ship or vessel
... shall severally forfeit and pay the sum of Five Hundred Pounds;"
one-half to the state, and one-half to the informer.

Â§ 2. "_And whereas_ it has been found by experience, that the act,
intituled, _An act to prevent the exportation of slaves, and for other
purposes_, has not produced all the good effects expected therefrom,"
any one exporting a slave to Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South
Carolina, Georgia, or the West Indies, without license, shall forfeit
Â£100 for each slave exported and Â£20 for each attempt.

Â§ 3. Slaves to be tried by jury for capital offences. _Laws of Delaware_
(ed. 1797), p. 942, ch. 194 b.


~1789, May 13. Congress (House): Proposed Duty on Slaves Imported.~

A tax of $10 per head on slaves imported, moved by Parker of Virginia.
After debate, withdrawn. _Annals of Cong._, 1 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 336-42.


~1789, Sept. 19. Congress (House): Bill to Tax Slaves Imported.~

A committee under Parker of Virginia reports, "a bill concerning the
importation of certain persons prior to the year 1808." Read once and
postponed until next session. _House Journal_ (repr. 1826), 1 Cong. 1
sess. I. 37, 114; _Annals of Cong._, 1 Cong. 1 sess., pp. 366, 903.


~1790, March 22. Congress (House): Declaration of Powers.~

See above, pages 82-83.


~1790, March 22. New York: Amendment of Act of 1788.~

"An Act to amend the act entitled 'An act concerning slaves.'"

"Whereas many inconveniences have arisen from the prohibiting the
exporting of slaves from this State. Therefore

"_Be it enacted_ ..., That where any slave shall hereafter be convicted
of a crime under the degree of a capital offence, in the supreme court,
or the court of oyer and terminer, and general gaol delivery, or a court
of general sessions of the peace within this State, it shall and may be
lawful to and for the master or mistress to cause such slave to be
transported out of this State," etc. _Laws of New York, 1789-96_ (ed.
1886), p. 151.


~1792, May. Connecticut: Act of 1788 Strengthened.~

"An Act in addition to an Act, entitled 'An Act to prevent the Slave
Trade.'"

This provided that persons directly or indirectly aiding or assisting in
slave-trading should be fined Â£100. All notes, bonds, mortgages, etc.,
of any kind, made or executed in payment for any slave imported contrary
to this act, are declared null and void. Persons removing from the State
might carry away their slaves. _Acts and Laws of Connecticut_ (ed.
1784), pp. 412-3.


~1792, Dec. 17. Virginia: Revision of Acts.~

"An Act to reduce into one, the several acts concerning slaves, free
negroes, and mulattoes."

Â§ 1. "_Be it enacted_ ..., That no persons shall henceforth be slaves
within this commonwealth, except such as were so on the seventeenth day
of October," 1785, "and the descendants of the females of them."

Â§ 2. "Slaves which shall hereafter be brought into this commonwealth,
and kept therein one whole year together, or so long at different times
as shall amount to one year, shall be free."

Â§ 4. "_Provided_, That nothing in this act contained, shall be construed
to extend to those who may incline to remove from any of the United
States and become citizens of this, if within sixty days after such
removal, he or she shall take the following oath before some justice of
the peace of this commonwealth: '_I, A.B., do swear, that my removal
into the state of Virginia, was with no intent of evading the laws for
preventing the further importation of slaves, nor have I brought with me
any slaves, with an intention of selling them, nor have any of the
slaves which I have brought with me, been imported from Africa, or any
of the West India islands, since the first day of November_,'" 1778,
etc.

Â§ 53. This act to be in force immediately. _Statutes at Large of
Virginia, New Series_, I. 122.


~1792, Dec. 21. South Carolina: Importation Prohibited until 1795.~

"An Act to prohibit the importation of Slaves from Africa, or other
places beyond sea, into this State, for two years; and also to prohibit
the importation or bringing in Slaves, or Negroes, Mulattoes, Indians,
Moors or Mestizoes, bound for a term of years, from any of the United
States, by land or by water."

"Whereas, it is deemed inexpedient to increase the number of slaves
within this State, in our present circumstances and situation;

Â§ 1. "_Be it therefore enacted_ ..., That no slave shall be imported
into this State from Africa, the West India Islands, or other place
beyond sea, for and during the term of two years, commencing from the
first day of January next, which will be in the year of our Lord one
thousand seven hundred and ninety-three."

Â§ 2. No slaves, Negroes, Indians, etc., bound for a term of years, to be
brought in from any of the United States or bordering countries.
Settlers may bring their slaves. Cooper, _Statutes_, VII. 431.


~1793, Dec. 19. Georgia: Importation Prohibited.~

"An act to prevent the importation of negroes into this state from the
places herein mentioned." Title only. Re-enacted (?) by the Constitution
of 1798. Marbury and Crawford, _Digest_, p. 442; Prince, _Digest_, p.
786.


~1794, North Carolina: Importation Prohibited.~

"An act to prevent the further importation and bringing of slaves and
indented servants of colour into this state."

Â§ 1. "_Be it enacted_ ..., That from and after the first day of May
next, no slave or indented servant of colour shall be imported or
brought into this state by land or water; nor shall any slave or
indented servant of colour, who may be imported or brought contrary to
the intent and meaning of this act, be bought, sold or hired by any
person whatever."

Â§ 2. Penalty for importing, Â£100 per slave; for buying or selling, the
same.

Â§ 4. Persons removing, travelling, etc., are excepted. The act was
amended slightly in 1796. Martin, _Iredell's Acts of Assembly_, II. 53,
94.


~1794, March 22. United States Statute: Export Slave-Trade Forbidden.~

"An Act to prohibit the carrying on the Slave Trade from the United
States to any foreign place or country." _Statutes at Large_, I. 347.
For proceedings in Congress, see _Senate Journal_ (repr. 1820), 3 Cong.
1 sess. II. 51; _House Journal_ (repr. 1826), 3 Cong. 1 sess. II. 76,
84, 85, 96, 98, 99, 100; _Annals of Cong._, 3 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 64, 70,
72.


~1794, Dec. 20. South Carolina: Act of 1792 Extended.~

"An Act to revive and extend an Act entitled 'An Act to prohibit the
importation of Slaves from Africa, or other places beyond Sea, into this
State, for two years; and also, to prohibit the importation or bringing
in of Negro Slaves, Mulattoes, Indians, Moors or Mestizoes, bound for a
term of years, from any of the United States, by Land or Water.'"

Â§ 1. Act of 1792 extended until Jan. 1, 1797.

Â§ 2. It shall not be lawful hereafter to import slaves, free Negroes,
etc., from the West Indies, any part of America outside the United
States, "or from other parts beyond sea." Such slaves are to be
forfeited and sold; the importer to be fined Â£50; free Negroes to be
re-transported. Cooper, _Statutes_, VII. 433.


~1795. North Carolina: Act against West Indian Slaves.~

"An act to prevent any person who may emigrate from any of the West
India or Bahama islands, or the French, Dutch or Spanish settlements on
the southern coast of America, from bringing slaves into this state, and
also for imposing certain restrictions on free persons of colour who
may hereafter come into this state." Penalty, Â£100 for each slave over
15 years of age. _Laws of North Carolina_ (revision of 1819), I. 786.


~1796. Maryland: Importation Prohibited.~

"An Act relating to Negroes, and to repeal the acts of assembly therein
mentioned."

"_Be it enacted_ ..., That it shall not be lawful, from and after the
passing of this act, to import or bring into this state, by land or
water, any negro, mulatto or other slave, for sale, or to reside within
this state; and any person brought into this state as a slave contrary
to this act, if a slave before, shall thereupon immediately cease to be
the property of the person or persons so importing or bringing such
slave within this state, and shall be free."

Â§ 2. Any citizen of the United States, coming into the State to take up
_bona fide_ residence, may bring with him, or within one year import,
any slave which was his property at the time of removal, "which slaves,
or the mother of which slaves, shall have been a resident of the United
States, or some one of them, three whole years next preceding such
removal."

Â§ 3. Such slaves cannot be sold within three years, except by will, etc.
In 1797, "A Supplementary Act," etc., slightly amended the preceding,
allowing guardians, executors, etc., to import the slaves of the estate.
Dorsey, _Laws_, I. 334, 344.


~1796, Dec. 19. South Carolina: Importation Prohibited until 1799.~

"An Act to prohibit the importation of Negroes, until the first day of
January, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-nine."

"Whereas, it appears to be highly impolitic to import negroes from
Africa, or other places beyond seas," etc. Extended by acts of Dec. 21,
1798, and Dec. 20, 1800, until Jan. 1, 1803. Cooper, _Statutes_, VII.
434, 436.


~1797, Jan. 18. Delaware: Codification of Acts.~

"An Act concerning Negro and Mulatto slaves."

Â§ 5. " ... any Negro or Mulatto slave, who hath been or shall be brought
into this state contrary to the intent and meaning of [the act of 1787];
and any Negro or Mulatto slave who hath been or shall be exported, or
sold with an intention for exportation, or carried out for sale from
this state, contrary to the intent and meaning of [the act of 1793],
shall be, and are hereby declared free; any thing in this act to the
contrary notwithstanding." _Laws of Delaware_ (ed. 1797), p. 1321, ch.
124 c.


~1798, Jan. 31. Georgia: Importation Prohibited.~

"An act to prohibit the further importation of slaves into this state."

Â§ 1. " ... six months after the passing of this act, it shall be
unlawful for any person or persons to import into this state, from
Africa or elsewhere, any negro or negroes of any age or sex." Every
person so offending shall forfeit for the first offence the sum of
$1,000 for every negro so imported, and for every subsequent offence the
sum of $1,000, one half for the use of the informer, and one half for
the use of the State.

Â§ 2. Slaves not to be brought from other States for sale after three
months.

Â§ 3. Persons convicted of bringing slaves into this State with a view to
sell them, are subject to the same penalties as if they had sold them.
Marbury and Crawford, _Digest_, p. 440.


~1798, March 14. New Jersey: Slave-Trade Prohibited.~

"An Act respecting slaves."

Â§ 12. "_And be it enacted_, That from and after the passing of this act,
it shall not be lawful for any person or persons whatsoever, to bring
into this state, either for sale or for servitude, any negro or other
slave whatsoever." Penalty, $140 for each slave; travellers and
temporary residents excepted.

Â§ 17. Any persons fitting out vessels for the slave-trade shall forfeit
them. Paterson, _Digest_, p. 307.


~1798, April 7. United States Statute: Importation into Mississippi
Territory Prohibited.~

"An Act for an amicable settlement of limits with the state of Georgia,
and authorizing the establishment of a government in the Mississippi
territory." _Statutes at Large_, I. 549. For proceedings in Congress,
see _Annals of Cong._, 5 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 511, 512, 513, 514, 515, 532,
533, 1235, 1249, 1277-84, 1296, 1298-1312, 1313, 1318.


~1798, May 30. Georgia: Constitutional Prohibition.~

Constitution of Georgia:--

Art. IV Â§ 11. "There shall be no future importation of slaves into this
state from Africa, or any foreign place, after the first day of October
next. The legislature shall have no power to pass laws for the
emancipation of slaves, without the consent of each of their respective
owners previous to such emancipation. They shall have no power to
prevent emigrants, from either of the United States to this state, from
bringing with them such persons as may be deemed slaves, by the laws of
any one of the United States." Marbury and Crawford, _Digest_, p. 30.


~1800, May 10. United States Statute: Americans Forbidden to Trade from
one Foreign Country to Another.~

"An Act in addition to the act intituled 'An act to prohibit the
carrying on the Slave Trade from the United States to any foreign place
or country.'" _Statutes at Large_, II. 70. For proceedings in Congress,
see _Senate Journal_ (repr. 1821), 6 Cong. 1 sess. III. 72, 77, 88, 92.


~1800, Dec. 20. South Carolina: Slaves and Free Negroes Prohibited.~

"An Act to prevent Negro Slaves and other persons of Colour, from being
brought into or entering this State." Supplemented Dec. 19, 1801, and
amended Dec. 18, 1802. Cooper, _Statutes_, VII. 436, 444, 447.


~1801, April 8. New York: Slave-Trade Prohibited.~

"An Act concerning slaves and servants."

" ... _And be it further enacted_, That no slave shall hereafter be
imported or brought into this State, unless the person importing or
bringing such slave shall be coming into this State with intent to
reside permanently therein and shall have resided without this State,
and also have owned such slave at least during one year next preceding
the importing or bringing in of such slave," etc. A certificate, sworn
to, must be obtained; any violation of this act or neglect to take out
such certificate will result in freedom to the slave. Any sale or
limited transfer of any person hereafter imported to be a public
offence, under penalty of $250, and freedom to the slave transferred.
The export of slaves or of any person freed by this act is forbidden,
under penalty of $250 and freedom to the slave. Transportation for crime
is permitted. Re-enacted with amendments March 31, 1817. _Laws of New
York, 1801_ (ed. 1887), pp. 547-52; _Laws of New York, 1817_ (ed. 1817),
p. 136.


~1803, Feb. 28. United States Statute: Importation into States
Prohibiting Forbidden.~

"An Act to prevent the importation of certain persons into certain
states, where, by the laws thereof, their admission is prohibited."
_Statutes at Large_, II. 205. For copy of the proposed bill which this
replaced, see _Annals of Cong._, 7 Cong. 2 sess. p. 467. For proceedings
in Congress, see _House Journal_ (repr. 1826), 7 Cong. 2 sess. IV 304,
324, 347; _Senate Journal_ (repr. 1821), 7 Cong. 2 sess. III. 267, 268,
269-70, 273, 275, 276, 279.


~1803, Dec. 17. South Carolina: African Slaves Admitted.~

"An Act to alter and amend the several Acts respecting the importation
or bringing into this State, from beyond seas, or elsewhere, Negroes and
other persons of colour; and for other purposes therein mentioned."

Â§ 1. Acts of 1792, 1794, 1796, 1798, 1800, 1802, hereby repealed.

Â§ 2. Importation of Negroes from the West Indies prohibited.

Â§ 3. No Negro over fifteen years of age to be imported from the United
States except under certificate of good character.

Â§ 5. Negroes illegally imported to be forfeited and sold, etc. Cooper,
_Statutes_, VII. 449.


~1804.~ [~Denmark.~

Act of 1792 abolishing the slave-trade goes into effect.]


~1804, Feb. 14. Congress (House): Proposed Censure of South Carolina.~

Representative Moore of South Carolina offered the following resolution,
as a substitute to Mr. Bard's taxing proposition of Jan. 6:--

"_Resolved_, That this House receive with painful sensibility
information that one of the Southern States, by a repeal of certain
prohibitory laws, have permitted a traffic unjust in its nature, and
highly impolitic in free Governments." Ruled out of order by the
chairman of the Committee of the Whole. _Annals of Cong._, 8 Cong. 1
sess. p. 1004.


~1804, Feb. 15. Congress (House): Proposed Duty.~

"_Resolved_, That a tax of ten dollars be imposed on every slave
imported into any part of the United States."

"_Ordered_, That a bill, or bills, be brought in, pursuant to the said
resolution," etc. Feb. 16 "a bill laying a duty on slaves imported into
the United States" was read, but was never considered. _House Journal_
(repr. 1826), 8 Cong. 1 sess. IV 523, 578, 580, 581-2, 585; _Annals of
Cong._, 8 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 820, 876, 991, 1012, 1020, 1024-36.


~1804, March 26. United States Statute: Slave-Trade Limited.~

"An Act erecting Louisiana into two territories," etc. Acts of 1794 and
1803 extended to Louisiana. _Statutes at Large_, II. 283. For
proceedings in Congress, see _Annals of Cong._, 8 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 106,
211, 223, 231, 233-4, 238, 255, 1038, 1054-68, 1069-79, 1128-30,
1185-9.


~1805, Feb. 15. Massachusetts: Proposed Amendment.~

"_Resolve requesting the Governor to transmit to the Senators and
Representatives in Congress, and the Executives of the several States
this Resolution, as an amendment to the Constitution of the United
States, respecting Slaves._" June 8, Governor's message; Connecticut
answers that it is inexpedient; Maryland opposes the proposition.
_Massachusetts Resolves_, February, 1805, p. 55; June, 1805, p. 18. See
below, March 3, 1805.


~1805, March 2. United States Statute: Slave-Trade to Orleans Territory
Permitted.~

"An Act further providing for the government of the territory of
Orleans."

Â§ 1. A territorial government erected similar to Mississippi, with same
rights and privileges.

Â§ 5. 6th Article of Ordinance of 1787, on slaves, not to extend to this
territory.

_Statutes at Large_, II. 322. For proceedings in Congress, see _Annals
of Cong._, 8 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 28, 30, 45-6, 47, 48, 54, 59-61, 69,
727-8, 871-2, 957, 1016-9, 1020-1, 1201, 1209-10, 1211. Cf. _Statutes at
Large_, II. 331; _Annals of Cong._, 8 Cong. 2 sess., pp. 50, 51, 52, 57,
68, 69, 1213, 1215. In _Journals_, see Index, Senate Bills Nos. 8, 11.


~1805, March 3. Congress (House): Massachusetts Proposition to Amend
Constitution.~

Mr. Varnum of Massachusetts presented the resolution of the Legislature
of Massachusetts, "instructing the Senators, and requesting the
Representatives in Congress, from the said State, to take all legal and
necessary steps, to use their utmost exertions, as soon as the same is
practicable, to obtain an amendment to the Federal Constitution, so as
to authorize and empower the Congress of the United States to pass a
law, whenever they may deem it expedient, to prevent the further
importation of slaves from any of the West India Islands, from the coast
of Africa, or elsewhere, into the United States, or any part thereof." A
motion was made that Congress have power to prevent further
importation; it was read and ordered to lie on the table. _House
Journal_ (repr. 1826), 8 Cong. 2 sess. V 171; _Annals of Cong._, 8 Cong.
2 sess. pp. 1221-2. For the original resolution, see _Massachusetts
Resolves_, May, 1802, to March, 1806, Vol. II. A. (State House ed., p.
239.)


~1805, Dec. 17. Congress (Senate): Proposition to Prohibit Importation.~

A "bill to prohibit the importation of certain persons therein described
into any port or place within the jurisdiction of the United States,
from and after" Jan. 1, 1808, was read twice and postponed. _Senate
Journal_ (repr. 1821), 9 Cong. 1 sess. IV. 10-11; _Annals of Cong._, 9
Cong. 1 sess. pp. 20-1.


~1806, Jan. 20. Congress (House): Vermont Proposed Amendment.~

"Mr. Olin, one of the Representatives from the State of Vermont,
presented to the House certain resolutions of the General Assembly of
the said State, proposing an article of amendment to the Constitution of
the United States, to prevent the further importation of slaves, or
people of color, from any of the West India Islands, from the coast of
Africa, or elsewhere, into the United States, or any part thereof; which
were read, and ordered to lie on the table." No further mention found.
_House Journal_ (repr. 1826), 9 Cong. 1 sess. V 238; _Annals of Cong._,
9 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 343-4.


~1806, Jan. 25. Virginia: Imported Slaves to be Sold.~

"An Act to amend the several laws concerning slaves."

Â§ 5. If the jury before whom the importer is brought "shall find that
the said slave or slaves were brought into this commonwealth, and have
remained therein, contrary to the provisions of this act, the court
shall make an order, directing him, her or them to be delivered to the
overseers of the poor, to be by them sold for cash and applied as herein
directed."

Â§ 8. Penalty for bringing slaves, $400 per slave; the same for buying
or hiring, knowingly, such a slave.

Â§ 16. This act to take effect May 1, 1806. _Statutes at Large of
Virginia_, New Series, III. 251.


~1806, Jan. 27. Congress (House): Bill to Tax Slaves Imported.~

"A Bill laying a duty on slaves imported into any of the United States."
Finally dropped. _House Journal_ (repr. 1826), 8 Cong. 2 sess. V. 129;
_Ibid._, 9 Cong. 1 sess. V. 195, 223, 240, 242, 243-4, 248, 260, 262,
264, 276-7, 287, 294, 305, 309, 338; _Annals of Cong._, 9 Cong. 1 sess.
pp. 273, 274, 346, 358, 372, 434, 442-4, 533.


~1806, Feb. 4. Congress (House): Proposition to Prohibit Slave-Trade
after 1807.~

Mr. Bidwell moved that the following section be added to the bill for
taxing slaves imported,--that any ship so engaged be forfeited. The
proposition was rejected, yeas, 17, nays, 86 (?). _Annals of Cong._, 9
Cong. 1 sess. p. 438.


~1806, Feb. 10. Congress (House): New Hampshire Proposed Amendment.~

"Mr. Tenney ... presented to the House certain resolutions of the
Legislature of the State of New Hampshire, 'proposing an amendment to
the Constitution of the United States, so as to authorize and empower
Congress to pass a law, whenever they may deem it expedient, to prevent
the further importation of slaves,' or people of color, into the United
States, or any part thereof." Read and laid on the table. _House
Journal_ (repr. 1826), 9 Cong. 1 sess. V. 266; _Annals of Cong._, 9
Cong. 1 sess. p. 448.


~1806, Feb. 17. Congress (House): Proposition on Slave-Trade.~

The committee on the slave-trade reported a resolution:--

"_Resolved_, That it shall not be lawful for any person or persons, to
import or bring into any of the Territories of the United States, any
slave or slaves that may hereafter be imported into the United States."
_House Journal_, 9 Cong. 1 sess. V 264, 278, 308, 345-6; _House
Reports_, 9 Cong. 1 sess. II. Feb. 17, 1806; _Annals of Cong._, 9 Cong.
1 sess. pp. 472-3.


~1806, April 7. Congress (Senate): Maryland Proposed Amendment.~

"Mr. Wright communicated a resolution of the legislature of the state of
Maryland instructing their Senators and Representatives in Congress to
use their utmost exertions to obtain an amendment to the constitution of
the United States to prevent the further importation of slaves;
whereupon, Mr. Wright submitted the following resolutions for the
consideration of the Senate....

"_Resolved_, That the migration or importation of slaves into the United
States, or any territory thereof, be prohibited after the first day of
January, 1808." Considered April 10, and further consideration postponed
until the first Monday in December next. _Senate Journal_ (repr. 1821),
9 Cong. 1 sess. IV. 76-7, 79; _Annals of Cong._, 9 Cong. 1 sess. pp.
229, 232.


~1806, Dec. 2. President Jefferson's Message.~

See above, pages 97-98. _House Journal_ (repr. 1826), 9 Cong. 2 sess. V.
468.


~1806, Dec. 15. Congress (House): Proposition on Slave-Trade.~

"A bill to prohibit the importation or bringing of slaves into the
United States, etc.," after Dec. 31, 1807. Finally merged into Senate
bill. _Ibid._, House Bill No. 148.


~1806, Dec. 17. Congress (House): Sloan's Proposition.~

Proposition to amend the House bill by inserting after the article
declaring the forfeiture of an illegally imported slave, "And such
person or slave shall be entitled to his freedom." Lost. _Annals of
Cong._, 9 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 167-77, 180-89.


~1806, Dec. 29. Congress (House): Sloan's Second Proposition.~

Illegally imported Africans to be either freed, apprenticed, or
returned to Africa. Lost; Jan. 5, 1807, a somewhat similar proposition
was also lost. _Ibid._, pp. 226-8, 254.


~1806, Dec. 31. Great Britain: Rejected Treaty.~

"Treaty of amity, commerce, and navigation, between His Britannic
Majesty and the United States of America."

"Art. XXIV. The high contracting parties engage to communicate to each
other, without delay, all such laws as have been or shall be hereafter
enacted by their respective Legislatures, as also all measures which
shall have been taken for the abolition or limitation of the African
slave trade; and they further agree to use their best endeavors to
procure the co-operation of other Powers for the final and complete
abolition of a trade so repugnant to the principles of justice and
humanity." _Amer. State Papers, Foreign_, III. 147, 151.


~1807, March 25. [England: Slave-Trade Abolished.~

"An Act for the Abolition of the Slave Trade." _Statute 47 George III._,
1 sess. ch. 36.]


~1807, Jan. 7. Congress (House): Bidwell's Proposition.~

"Provided, that no person shall be sold as a slave by virtue of this
act." Offered as an amendment to Â§ 3 of House bill; defeated 60 to 61,
Speaker voting. A similar proposition was made Dec. 23, 1806. _House
Journal_ (repr. 1826), 9 Cong. 2 sess. V. 513-6. Cf. _Annals of Cong._,
9 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 199-203, 265-7.


~1807, Feb. 9. Congress (House): Section Seven of House Bill.~

Â§ 7 of the bill reported to the House by the committee provided that all
Negroes imported should be conveyed whither the President might direct
and there be indentured as apprentices, or employed in whatever way the
President might deem best for them and the country; provided that no
such Negroes should be indentured or employed except in some State in
which provision is now made for the gradual abolition of slavery. Blank
spaces were left for limiting the term of indenture. The report was
never acted on. _Annals of Cong._, 9 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 477-8.


~1807, March 2. United States Statute: Importation Prohibited.~

"An Act to prohibit the importation of Slaves into any port or place
within the jurisdiction of the United States, from and after the first
day of January, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
eight." Bills to amend Â§ 8, so as to make less ambiguous the permit
given to the internal traffic, were introduced Feb. 27 and Nov. 27.
_Statutes at Large_, II. 426. For proceedings in Senate, see _Senate
Journal_ (repr. 1821), 9 Cong. 1-2 sess. IV. 11, 112, 123, 124, 132,
133, 150, 158, 164, 165, 167, 168; _Annals of Cong._, 9 Cong. 2 sess.
pp. 16, 19, 23, 33, 36, 45, 47, 68, 69, 70, 71, 79, 87, 93. For
proceedings in House, see _House Journal_ (repr. 1826), 9 Cong. 2 sess.
V. 470, 482, 488, 490, 491, 496, 500, 504, 510, 513-6, 517, 540, 557,
575, 579, 581, 583-4, 585, 592, 594, 610, 613-4, 616, 623, 638, 640; 10
Cong. 1 sess. VI. 27, 50; _Annals of Cong._, 9 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 167,
180, 200, 220, 231, 254, 264, 270.


~1808, Feb. 23. Congress (Senate): Proposition to Amend Constitution.~

"Agreeably to instructions from the legislature of the state of
Pennsylvania to their Senators in Congress, Mr. Maclay submitted the
following resolution, which was read for consideration:--

"_Resolved_ ..., That the Constitution of the United States be so
altered and amended, as to prevent the Congress of the United States,
and the legislatures of any state in the Union, from authorizing the
importation of slaves." No further mention. _Senate Journal_ (repr.
1821), 10 Cong. 1 sess. IV. 235; _Annals of Cong._, 10 Cong. 1 sess. p.
134. For the full text of the instructions, see _Amer. State Papers,
Miscellaneous_, I. 716.


~1810, Dec. 5. President Madison's Message.~

"Among the commercial abuses still committed under the American flag,
... it appears that American citizens are instrumental in carrying on a
traffic in enslaved Africans, equally in violation of the laws of
humanity, and in defiance of those of their own country. The same just
and benevolent motives which produced the interdiction in force against
this criminal conduct, will doubtless be felt by Congress, in devising
further means of suppressing the evil." _House Journal_ (repr. 1826), 11
Cong. 3 sess. VII. 435.


~1811, Jan. 15. United States Statute: Secret Act and Joint Resolution
against Amelia Island Smugglers.~

_Statutes at Large_, III. 471 ff.


~1815, March 29. [France: Abolition of Slave-Trade.~

Napoleon on his return from Elba decrees the abolition of the
slave-trade. Decree re-enacted in 1818 by the Bourbon dynasty. _British
and Foreign State Papers_, 1815-16, p. 196, note; 1817-18, p. 1025.]


~1815, Feb. 18. Great Britain: Treaty of Ghent.~

"Treaty of peace and amity. Concluded December 24, 1814; Ratifications
exchanged at Washington February 17, 1815; Proclaimed February 18,
1815."

Art. X. "Whereas the traffic in slaves is irreconcilable with the
principles of humanity and justice, and whereas both His Majesty and the
United States are desirous of continuing their efforts to promote its
entire abolition, it is hereby agreed that both the contracting parties
shall use their best endeavors to accomplish so desirable an object."
_U.S. Treaties and Conventions_ (ed. 1889), p. 405.


~1815, Dec. 8. Alabama and Mississippi Territory: Act to Dispose of
Illegally Imported Slaves.~

"An Act concerning Slaves brought into this Territory, contrary to the
Laws of the United States." Slaves to be sold at auction, and the
proceeds to be divided between the territorial treasury and the
collector or informer. Toulmin, _Digest of the Laws of Alabama_, p. 637;
_Statutes of Mississippi digested_, etc. (ed. 1816), p. 389.


~1816, Nov. 18. North Carolina: Act to Dispose of Illegally Imported
Slaves.~

"An act to direct the disposal of negroes, mulattoes and persons of
colour, imported into this state, contrary to the provisions of an act
of the Congress of the United States, entitled 'an act to prohibit the
importation of slaves into any port or place, within the jurisdiction of
the United States, from and after the first day of January, in the year
of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and eight.'"

Â§ 1. Every slave illegally imported after 1808 shall be sold for the use
of the State.

Â§ 2. The sheriff shall seize and sell such slave, and pay the proceeds
to the treasurer of the State.

Â§ 3. If the slave abscond, the sheriff may offer a reward not exceeding
one-fifth of the value of the slave. _Laws of North Carolina, 1816_, ch.
xii. p. 9; _Laws of North Carolina_ (revision of 1819), II. 1350.


~1816, Dec. 3. President Madison's Message.~

"The United States having been the first to abolish, within the extent
of their authority, the transportation of the natives of Africa into
slavery, by prohibiting the introduction of slaves, and by punishing
their citizens participating in the traffick, cannot but be gratified at
the progress, made by concurrent efforts of other nations, towards a
general suppression of so great an evil. They must feel, at the same
time, the greater solicitude to give the fullest efficacy to their own
regulations. With that view, the interposition of Congress appears to be
required by the violations and evasions which, it is suggested, are
chargeable on unworthy citizens, who mingle in the slave trade under
foreign flags, and with foreign ports; and by collusive importations of
slaves into the United States, through adjoining ports and territories.
I present the subject to Congress, with a full assurance of their
disposition to apply all the remedy which can be afforded by an
amendment of the law. The regulations which were intended to guard
against abuses of a kindred character, in the trade between the several
States, ought also to be rendered more effectual for their humane
object." _House Journal_, 14 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 15-6.


~1817, Feb. 11. Congress (House): Proposed Joint Resolution.~

"Joint Resolution for abolishing the traffick in Slaves, and the
Colinization [_sic_] of the Free People of Colour of the United States."

"_Resolved_, ... That the President be, and he is hereby authorized to
consult and negotiate with all the governments where ministers of the
United States are, or shall be accredited, on the means of effecting an
entire and immediate abolition of the traffick in slaves. And, also, to
enter into a convention with the government of Great Britain, for
receiving into the colony of Sierra Leone, such of the free people of
colour of the United States as, with their own consent, shall be carried
thither....

"_Resolved_, That adequate provision shall hereafter be made to defray
any necessary expenses which may be incurred in carrying the preceding
resolution into effect." Reported on petition of the Colonization
Society by the committee on the President's Message. No further record.
_House Journal_, 14 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 25-7, 380; _House Doc._, 14 Cong.
2 sess. No. 77.


~1817, July 28. [Great Britain and Portugal: First Concession of Right
of Search.~

"By this treaty, ships of war of each of the nations might visit
merchant vessels of both, if suspected of having slaves on board,
acquired by illicit traffic." This "related only to the trade north of
the equator; for the slave-trade of Portugal within the regions of
western Africa, to the south of the equator, continued long after this
to be carried on with great vigor." Woolsey, _International Law_
(1874), Â§ 197, pp. 331-2; _British and Foreign State Papers_, 1816-17,
pp. 85-118.]


~1817, Sept. 23. [Great Britain and Spain: Abolition of Trade North of
Equator.~

"By the treaty of Madrid, ... Great Britain obtained from Spain, for the
sum of four hundred thousand pounds, the immediate abolition of the
trade north of the equator, its entire abolition after 1820, and the
concession of the same mutual right of search, which the treaty with
Portugal had just established." Woolsey, _International Law_ (1874), Â§
197, p. 332; _British and Foreign State Papers_, 1816-17, pp. 33-74.]


~1817, Dec. 2. President Monroe's Message on Amelia Island, etc.~

"A just regard for the rights and interests of the United States
required that they [i.e., the Amelia Island and Galveston pirates]
should be suppressed, and orders have been accordingly issued to that
effect. The imperious considerations which produced this measure will be
explained to the parties whom it may, in any degree, concern." _House
Journal_, 15 Cong. 1 sess. p. 11.


~1817, Dec. 19. Georgia: Act to Dispose of Illegally Imported Slaves.~

"An Act for disposing of any such negro, mulatto, or person of color,
who has been or may hereafter be imported or brought into this State in
violation of an act of the United States, entitled an act to prohibit
the importation of slaves," etc.

Â§ 1. The governor by agent shall receive such Negroes, and,

Â§ 2. sell them, or,

Â§ 3. give them to the Colonization Society to be transported, on
condition that the Society reimburse the State for all expense, and
transport them at their own cost. Prince, _Digest_, p. 793.


~1818, Jan. 10. Congress (House): Bill to Supplement Act of 1807.~

Mr. Middleton, from the committee on so much of the President's Message
as related to the illicit introduction of slaves into the United States
from Amelia Island, reported a bill in addition to former acts
prohibiting the introduction of slaves into the United States. This was
read twice and committed; April 1 it was considered in Committee of the
Whole; Mr. Middleton offered a substitute, which was ordered to be laid
on table and to be printed; it became the Act of 1819. See below, March
3, 1819. _House Journal_, 15 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 131, 410.


~1818, Jan. 13. President Monroe's Special Message.~

"I have the satisfaction to inform Congress, that the establishment at
Amelia Island has been suppressed, and without the effusion of blood.
The papers which explain this transaction, I now lay before Congress,"
etc. _Ibid._, pp. 137-9.


~1818, Feb. 9. Congress (Senate): Bill to Register (?) Slaves.~

"A bill respecting the transportation of persons of color, for sale, or
to be held to labor." Passed Senate, dropped in House; similar bill Dec.
9, 1818, also dropped in House. _Senate Journal_, 15 Cong. 1 sess. pp.
147, 152, 157, 165, 170, 188, 201, 203, 232, 237; 15 Cong. 2 sess. pp.
63, 74, 77, 202, 207, 285, 291, 297; _House Journal_, 15 Cong. 1 sess.
p. 332; 15 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 303, 305, 316.


~1818, April 4. Congress (House): Proposition to Amend Constitution.~

Mr. Livermore's resolution:--

"No person shall be held to service or labour as a slave, nor shall
slavery be tolerated in any state hereafter admitted into the Union, or
made one of the United States of America." Read, and on the question,
"Will the House consider the same?" it was determined in the negative.
_House Journal_, 15 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 420-1; _Annals of Cong._, 15 Cong.
1 sess. pp. 1675-6.


~1818, April 20. United States Statute: Act in Addition to Act of 1807.~

"An Act in addition to 'An act to prohibit the introduction
[importation] of slaves into any port or place within the jurisdiction
of the United States, from and after the first day of January, in the
year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and eight,' and to repeal
certain parts of the same." _Statutes at Large_, III. 450. For
proceedings in Congress, see _Senate Journal_, 15 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 243,
304, 315, 333, 338, 340, 348, 377, 386, 388, 391, 403, 406; _House
Journal_, 15 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 450, 452, 456, 468, 479, 484, 492,505.


~1818, May 4. [Great Britain and Netherlands: Treaty.~

Right of Search granted for the suppression of the slave-trade. _British
and Foreign State Papers_, 1817-18, pp. 125-43.]


~1818, Dec. 19. Georgia: Act of 1817 Reinforced.~

No title found. "_Whereas_ numbers of African slaves have been illegally
introduced into the State, in direct violation of the laws of the United
States and of this State, _Be it therefore enacted_," etc. Informers are
to receive one-tenth of the net proceeds from the sale of illegally
imported Africans, "_Provided_, nothing herein contained shall be so
construed as to extend farther back than the year 1817." Prince,
_Digest_, p. 798.


~1819, Feb. 8. Congress (Senate): Bill in Addition to Former Acts.~

"A bill supplementary to an act, passed the 2d day of March, 1807,
entitled," etc. Postponed. _Senate Journal_, 15 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 234,
244, 311-2, 347.


~1819, March 3. United States Statute: Cruisers Authorized, etc.~

"An Act in addition to the Acts prohibiting the slave trade." _Statutes
at Large_, III. 532. For proceedings in Congress, see _Senate Journal_,
15 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 338, 339, 343, 345, 350, 362; _House Journal_, 15
Cong. 2 sess. pp. 9-19, 42-3, 150, 179, 330, 334, 341, 343, 352.


~1819, Dec. 7. President Monroe's Message.~

"Due attention has likewise been paid to the suppression of the slave
trade, in compliance with a law of the last session. Orders have been
given to the commanders of all our public ships to seize all vessels
navigated under our flag, engaged in that trade, and to bring them in,
to be proceeded against, in the manner prescribed by that law. It is
hoped that these vigorous measures, supported by like acts by other
nations, will soon terminate a commerce so disgraceful to the civilized
world." _House Journal_, 16 Cong, 1 sess. p. 18.


~1820, Jan. 19. Congress (House): Proposed Registry of Slaves.~

"On motion of Mr. Cuthbert,

"Resolved, That the Committee on the Slave Trade be instructed to
enquire into the expediency of establishing a registry of slaves, more
effectually to prevent the importation of slaves into the United States,
or the territories thereof." No further mention. _Ibid._, p. 150.


~1820, Feb. 5. Congress (House): Proposition on Slave-Trade.~

"Mr. Meigs submitted the following preamble and resolution:

"Whereas, slavery in the United States is an evil of great and
increasing magnitude; one which merits the greatest efforts of this
nation to remedy: Therefore,

"Resolved, That a committee be appointed to enquire into the expediency
of devoting the public lands as a fund for the purpose of,

"1st, Employing a naval force competent to the annihilation of the slave
trade;

"2dly, The emancipation of slaves in the United States; and,

"3dly, Colonizing them in such way as shall be conducive to their
comfort and happiness, in Africa, their mother country." Read, and, on
motion of Walker of North Carolina, ordered to lie on the table. Feb. 7,
Mr. Meigs moved that the House now consider the above-mentioned
resolution, but it was decided in the negative. Feb. 18, he made a
similar motion and proceeded to discussion, but was ruled out of order
by the Speaker. He appealed, but the Speaker was sustained, and the
House refused to take up the resolution. No further record appears.
_Ibid._, pp. 196, 200, 227.


~1820, Feb. 23. Massachusetts: Slavery in Western Territory.~

_"Resolve respecting Slavery":--_

"The Committee of both Houses, who were appointed to consider 'what
measures it may be proper for the Legislature of this Commonwealth to
adopt, in the expression of their sentiments and views, relative to the
interesting subject, now before Congress, of interdicting slavery in the
New States, which may be admitted into the Union, beyond the River
Mississippi,' respectfully submit the following report: ...

"Nor has this question less importance as to its influence on the slave
trade. Should slavery be further permitted, an immense new market for
slaves would be opened. It is well known that notwithstanding the
strictness of our laws, and the vigilance of the government, thousands
are now annually imported from Africa," etc. _Massachusetts Resolves_,
May, 1819, to February, 1824, pp. 147-51.


~1820, May 12. Congress (House): Resolution for Negotiation.~

"Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
States of America in Congress assembled, That the President of the
United States be requested to negociate with all the governments where
ministers of the United States are or shall be accredited, on the means
of effecting an entire and immediate abolition of the slave trade."
Passed House, May 12, 1820; lost in Senate, May 15, 1820. _House
Journal_, 16 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 497, 518, 520-21, 526; _Annals of Cong._,
16 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 697-700.


~1820, May 15. United States Statute: Slave-Trade made Piracy.~

"An act to continue in force 'An act to protect the commerce of the
United States, and punish the crime of piracy,' and also to make further
provisions for punishing the crime of piracy." Continued by several
statutes until passage of the Act of 1823, _q.v. Statutes at Large_,
III. 600. For proceedings in Congress, see _Senate Journal_, 16 Cong. 1
sess. pp. 238, 241, 268, 286-7, 314, 331, 346, 350, 409, 412, 417, 422,
424, 425; _House Journal_, 16 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 453, 454, 494, 518, 520,
522, 537, 539, 540, 542. There was also a House bill, which was dropped:
cf. _House Journal_, 16 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 21, 113, 280, 453, 494.


~1820, Nov. 14. President Monroe's Message.~

"In execution of the law of the last session, for the suppression of the
slave trade, some of our public ships have also been employed on the
coast of Africa, where several captures have already been made of
vessels engaged in that disgraceful traffic." _Senate Journal_, 16 Cong.
2 sess. pp. 16-7.


~1821, Feb. 15. Congress (House): Meigs's Resolution.~

Mr. Meigs offered in modified form the resolutions submitted at the last
session:--

"Whereas slavery, in the United States, is an evil, acknowledged to be
of great and increasing magnitude, ... therefore,

"Resolved, That a committee be appointed to inquire into the expediency
of devoting five hundred million acres of the public lands, next west of
the Mississippi, as a fund for the purpose of, in the

"_First place_; Employing a naval force, competent to the annihilation
of the slave trade," etc. Question to consider decided in the
affirmative, 63 to 50; laid on the table, 66 to 55. _House Journal_, 16
Cong. 2 sess. p. 238; _Annals of Cong._, 16 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 1168-70.


~1821, Dec. 3. President Monroe's Message.~

"Like success has attended our efforts to suppress the slave trade.
Under the flag of the United States, and the sanction of their papers,
the trade may be considered as entirely suppressed; and, if any of our
citizens are engaged in it, under the flag and papers of other powers,
it is only from a respect to the rights of those powers, that these
offenders are not seized and brought home, to receive the punishment
which the laws inflict. If every other power should adopt the same
policy, and pursue the same vigorous means for carrying it into effect,
the trade could no longer exist." _House Journal_, 17 Cong. 1 sess. p.
22.


~1822, April 12. Congress (House): Proposed Resolution.~

"_Resolved_, That the President of the United States be requested to
enter into such arrangements as he may deem suitable and proper, with
one or more of the maritime powers of Europe, for the effectual
abolition of the slave trade." _House Reports_, 17 Cong. 1 sess. II. No.
92, p. 4; _Annals of Cong._, 17 Cong. 1 sess. p. 1538.


~1822, June 18. Mississippi: Act on Importation, etc.~

"An act, to reduce into one, the several acts, concerning slaves, free
negroes, and mulattoes."

Â§ 2. Slaves born and resident in the United States, and not criminals,
may be imported.

Â§ 3. No slave born or resident outside the United States shall be
brought in, under penalty of $1,000 per slave. Travellers are excepted.
_Revised Code of the Laws of Mississippi_ (Natchez, 1824), p. 369.


~1822, Dec. 3. President Monroe's Message.~

"A cruise has also been maintained on the coast of Africa, when the
season would permit, for the suppression of the slave-trade; and orders
have been given to the commanders of all our public ships to seize our
own vessels, should they find any engaged in that trade, and to bring
them in for adjudication." _House Journal_, 17 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 12, 21.


~1823, Jan. 1. Alabama: Act to Dispose of Illegally Imported Slaves.~

"An Act to carry into effect the laws of the United States prohibiting
the slave trade."

Â§ 1. "_Be it enacted_, ... That the Governor of this state be ...
authorized and required to appoint some suitable person, as the agent of
the state, to receive all and every slave or slaves or persons of
colour, who may have been brought into this state in violation of the
laws of the United States, prohibiting the slave trade: _Provided_, that
the authority of the said agent is not to extend to slaves who have been
condemned and sold."

Â§ 2. The agent must give bonds.

Â§ 3. "_And be it further enacted_, That the said slaves, when so placed
in the possession of the state, as aforesaid, shall be employed on such
public work or works, as shall be deemed by the Governor of most value
and utility to the public interest."

Â§ 4. A part may be hired out to support those employed in public work.

Â§ 5. "_And be it further enacted_, That in all cases in which a decree
of any court having competent authority, shall be in favor of any or
claimant or claimants, the said slaves shall be truly and faithfully, by
said agent, delivered to such claimant or claimants: but in case of
their condemnation, they shall be sold by such agent for cash to the
highest bidder, by giving sixty days notice," etc. _Acts of the Assembly
of Alabama, 1822_ (Cahawba, 1823), p. 62.


~1823, Jan. 30. United States Statute: Piracy Act made Perpetual.~

"An Act in addition to 'An act to continue in force "An act to protect
the commerce of the United States, and punish the crime of piracy,"'"
etc. _Statutes at Large_, III. 510-14, 721, 789. For proceedings in
Congress, see _Senate Journal_, 17 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 61, 64, 70, 83, 98,
101, 106, 110, 111, 122, 137; _House Journal_, 17 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 73,
76, 156, 183, 189.


~1823, Feb. 10. Congress (House): Resolution on Slave-Trade.~

Mr. Mercer offered the following resolution:--

"Resolved, That the President of the United States be requested to enter
upon, and to prosecute, from time to time, such negotiations with the
several maritime powers of Europe and America, as he may deem expedient,
for the effectual abolition of the African slave trade, and its ultimate
denunciation as piracy, under the law of nations, by the consent of the
civilized world." Agreed to Feb. 28; passed Senate. _House Journal_, 17
Cong. 2 sess. pp. 212, 280-82; _Annals of Cong._, 17 Cong. 2 sess. pp.
928, 1147-55.


~1823, March 3. United States Statute: Appropriation.~

"An Act making appropriations for the support of the navy," etc.

"To enable the President of the United States to carry into effect the
act" of 1819, $50,000. _Statutes at Large_, III. 763, 764


~1823. President: Proposed Treaties.~

Letters to various governments in accordance with the resolution of
1823: April 28, to Spain; May 17, to Buenos Ayres; May 27, to United
States of Colombia; Aug. 14, to Portugal. See above, Feb. 10, 1823.
_House Doc._, 18 Cong. 1 sess. VI. No. 119.


~1823, June 24. Great Britain: Proposed Treaty.~

Adams, March 31, proposes that the trade be made piracy. Canning, April
8, reminds Adams of the treaty of Ghent and asks for the granting of a
mutual Right of Search to suppress the slave-trade. The matter is
further discussed until June 24. Minister Rush is empowered to propose a
treaty involving the Right of Search, etc. This treaty was substantially
the one signed (see below, March 13, 1824), differing principally in the
first article.

"Article I. The two high contracting Powers, having each separately, by
its own laws, subjected their subjects and citizens, who may be
convicted of carrying on the illicit traffic in slaves on the coast of
Africa, to the penalties of piracy, do hereby agree to use their
influence, respectively, with the other maritime and civilized nations
of the world, to the end that the said African slave trade may be
recognized, and declared to be, piracy, under the law of nations."
_House Doc._, 18 Cong, 1 sess. VI. No. 119.


~1824, Feb. 6. Congress (House): Proposition to Amend Constitution.~

Mr. Abbot's resolution on persons of color:--

"That no part of the constitution of the United States ought to be
construed, or shall be construed to authorize the importation or ingress
of any person of color into any one of the United States, contrary to
the laws of such state." Read first and second time and committed to the
Committee of the Whole. _House Journal_, 18 Cong. 1 sess. p. 208;
_Annals of Cong._, 18 Cong. 1 sess. p. 1399.


~1824, March 13. Great Britain: Proposed Treaty of 1824.~

"The Convention:"--

Art. I. "The commanders and commissioned officers of each of the two
high contracting parties, duly authorized, under the regulations and
instructions of their respective Governments, to cruize on the coasts of
Africa, of America, and of the West Indies, for the suppression of the
slave trade," shall have the power to seize and bring into port any
vessel owned by subjects of the two contracting parties, found engaging
in the slave-trade. The vessel shall be taken for trial to the country
where she belongs.

Art. II. Provides that even if the vessel seized does not belong to a
citizen or citizens of either of the two contracting parties, but is
chartered by them, she may be seized in the same way as if she belonged
to them.

Art. III. Requires that in all cases where any vessel of either party
shall be boarded by any naval officer of the other party, on suspicion
of being concerned in the slave-trade, the officer shall deliver to the
captain of the vessel so boarded a certificate in writing, signed by the
naval officer, specifying his rank, etc., and the object of his visit.
Provision is made for the delivery of ships and papers to the tribunal
before which they are brought.

Art. IV. Limits the Right of Search, recognized by the Convention, to
such investigation as shall be necessary to ascertain the fact whether
the said vessel is or is not engaged in the slave-trade. No person shall
be taken out of the vessel so visited unless for reasons of health.

Art. V. Makes it the duty of the commander of either nation, having
captured a vessel of the other under the treaty, to receive unto his
custody the vessel captured, and send or carry it into some port of the
vessel's own country for adjudication, in which case triplicate
declarations are to be signed, etc.

Art. VI. Provides that in cases of capture by the officer of either
party, on a station where no national vessel is cruising, the captor
shall either send or carry his prize to some convenient port of its own
country for adjudication, etc.

Art. VII. Provides that the commander and crew of the captured vessel
shall be proceeded against as pirates, in the ports to which they are
brought, etc.

Art. VIII. Confines the Right of Search, under this treaty, to such
officers of both parties as are especially authorized to execute the
laws of their countries in regard to the slave-trade. For every abusive
exercise of this right, officers are to be personally liable in costs
and damages, etc.

Art. IX. Provides that the government of either nation shall inquire
into abuses of this Convention and of the laws of the two countries, and
inflict on guilty officers the proper punishment.

Art. X. Declares that the right, reciprocally conceded by this treaty,
is wholly and exclusively founded on the consideration that the two
nations have by their laws made the slave-trade piracy, and is not to be
taken to affect in any other way the rights of the parties, etc.; it
further engages that each power shall use its influence with all other
civilized powers, to procure from them the acknowledgment that the
slave-trade is piracy under the law of nations.

Art. XI. Provides that the ratifications of the treaty shall be
exchanged at London within twelve months, or as much sooner as possible.
Signed by Mr. Rush, Minister to the Court of St. James, March 13, 1824.

The above is a synopsis of the treaty as it was laid before the Senate.
It was ratified by the Senate with certain conditions, one of which was
that the duration of this treaty should be limited to the pleasure of
the two parties on six months' notice; another was that the Right of
Search should be limited to the African and West Indian seas: i.e., the
word "America" was struck out. This treaty as amended and passed by the
Senate (cf. above, p. 141) was rejected by Great Britain. A counter
project was suggested by her, but not accepted (cf. above, p. 144). The
striking out of the word "America" was declared to be the insuperable
objection. _Senate Doc._, 18 Cong. 2 sess. I. No. 1, pp. 15-20; _Niles's
Register_, 3rd Series, XXVI. 230-2. For proceedings in Senate, see
_Amer. State Papers, Foreign_, V. 360-2.


~1824, March 31. [Great Britain: Slave-Trade made Piracy.~

"An Act for the more effectual Suppression of the _African_ Slave
Trade."

Any person engaging in the slave-trade "shall be deemed and adjudged
guilty of Piracy, Felony and Robbery, and being convicted thereof shall
suffer Death without Benefit of Clergy, and Loss of Lands, Goods and
Chattels, as Pirates, Felons and Robbers upon the Seas ought to suffer,"
etc. _Statute 5 George IV._, ch. 17; _Amer. State Papers, Foreign_, V.
342.]


~1824, April 16. Congress (House): Bill to Suppress Slave-Trade.~

"Mr. Govan, from the committee to which was referred so much of the
President's Message as relates to the suppression of the Slave Trade,
reported a bill respecting the slave trade; which was read twice, and
committed to a Committee of the Whole."

Â§ 1. Provided a fine not exceeding $5,000, imprisonment not exceeding 7
years, and forfeiture of ship, for equipping a slaver even for the
foreign trade; and a fine not exceeding $3,000, and imprisonment not
exceeding 5 years, for serving on board any slaver. _Annals of Cong._,
18 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 2397-8; _House Journal_, 18 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 26,
180, 181, 323, 329, 356, 423.


~1824, May 21. President Monroe's Message on Treaty of 1824.~

_Amer. State Papers, Foreign_, V. 344-6.


~1824, Nov. 6. [Great Britain and Sweden: Treaty.~

Right of Search granted for the suppression of the slave-trade. _British
and Foreign State Papers_, 1824-5, pp. 3-28.]


~1824, Nov. 6. Great Britain: Counter Project of 1825.~

Great Britain proposes to conclude the treaty as amended by the Senate,
if the word "America" is reinstated in Art. I. (Cf. above, March 13,
1824.) February 16, 1825, the House Committee favors this project; March
2, Addington reminds Adams of this counter proposal; April 6, Clay
refuses to reopen negotiations on account of the failure of the
Colombian treaty. _Amer. State Papers, Foreign_, V. 367; _House
Reports_, 18 Cong. 2 sess. I. No. 70; _House Doc._, 19 Cong. 1 sess. I.
No. 16.


~1824, Dec. 7. President Monroe's Message.~

"It is a cause of serious regret, that no arrangement has yet been
finally concluded between the two Governments, to secure, by joint
co-operation, the suppression of the slave trade. It was the object of
the British Government, in the early stages of the negotiation, to adopt
a plan for the suppression, which should include the concession of the
mutual right of search by the ships of war of each party, of the
vessels of the other, for suspected offenders. This was objected to by
this Government, on the principle that, as the right of search was a
right of war of a belligerant towards a neutral power, it might have an
ill effect to extend it, by treaty, to an offence which had been made
comparatively mild, to a time of peace. Anxious, however, for the
suppression of this trade, it was thought adviseable, in compliance with
a resolution of the House of Representatives, founded on an act of
Congress, to propose to the British Government an expedient, which
should be free from that objection, and more effectual for the object,
by making it piratical.... A convention to this effect was concluded and
signed, in London," on the 13th of March, 1824, "by plenipotentiaries
duly authorized by both Governments, to the ratification of which
certain obstacles have arisen, which are not yet entirely removed." [For
the removal of which, the documents relating to the negotiation are
submitted for the action of Congress]....

"In execution of the laws for the suppression of the slave trade, a
vessel has been occasionally sent from that squadron to the coast of
Africa, with orders to return thence by the usual track of the slave
ships, and to seize any of our vessels which might be engaged in that
trade. None have been found, and, it is believed, that none are thus
employed. It is well known, however, that the trade still exists under
other flags." _House Journal_, 18 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 11, 12, 19, 27, 241;
_House Reports_, 18 Cong. 2 sess. I. No. 70; Gales and Seaton, _Register
of Debates_, I. 625-8, and Appendix, p. 2 ff.


~1825, Feb. 21. United States of Colombia: Proposed Treaty.~

The President sends to the Senate a treaty with the United States of
Colombia drawn, as United States Minister Anderson said, similar to that
signed at London, with the alterations made by the Senate. March 9,
1825, the Senate rejects this treaty. _Amer. State Papers, Foreign_, V.
729-35.


~1825, Feb. 28. Congress (House): Proposed Resolution on Slave-Trade.~

Mr. Mercer laid on the table the following resolution:--

"_Resolved_, That the President of the United States be requested to
enter upon, and prosecute from time to time, such negotiations with the
several maritime powers of Europe and America, as he may deem expedient
for the effectual abolition of the slave trade, and its ultimate
denunciation, as piracy, under the law of nations, by the consent of the
civilized world." The House refused to consider the resolution. _House
Journal_, 18 Cong. 2 sess. p. 280; Gales and Seaton, _Register of
Debates_, I. 697, 736.


~1825, March 3. Congress (House): Proposed Resolution against Right of
Search.~

"Mr. Forsyth submitted the following resolution:

"_Resolved_, That while this House anxiously desires that the Slave
Trade should be, universally, denounced as Piracy, and, as such, should
be detected and punished under the law of nations, it considers that it
would be highly inexpedient to enter into engagements with any foreign
power, by which _all_ the merchant vessels of the United States would be
exposed to the inconveniences of any regulation of search, from which
any merchant vessels of that foreign power would be exempted."
Resolution laid on the table. _House Journal_, 18 Cong. 2 sess. pp.
308-9; Gales and Seaton, _Register of Debates_, I. 739.


~1825, Dec. 6. President Adams's Message.~

"The objects of the West India Squadron have been, to carry into
execution the laws for the suppression of the African Slave Trade: for
the protection of our commerce against vessels of piratical
character.... These objects, during the present year, have been
accomplished more effectually than at any former period. The African
Slave Trade has long been excluded from the use of our flag; and if some
few citizens of our country have continued to set the laws of the Union,
as well as those of nature and humanity, at defiance, by persevering in
that abominable traffic, it has been only by sheltering themselves under
the banners of other nations, less earnest for the total extinction of
the trade than ours." _House Journal_, 19 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 20, 96,
296-7, 305, 323, 329, 394-5, 399, 410, 414, 421, 451, 640.


~1826, Feb. 14. Congress (House): Proposition to Repeal Parts of Act of
1819.~

"Mr. Forsyth submitted the following resolutions, viz.:

1. "_Resolved_, That it is expedient to repeal so much of the act of the
3d March, 1819, entitled, 'An act in addition to the acts prohibiting
the slave trade,' as provides for the appointment of agents on the coast
of Africa.

2. "_Resolved_, That it is expedient so to modify the said act of the 3d
of March, 1819, as to release the United States from all obligation to
support the negroes already removed to the coast of Africa, and to
provide for such a disposition of those taken in slave ships who now are
in, or who may be, hereafter, brought into the United States, as shall
secure to them a fair opportunity of obtaining a comfortable
subsistence, without any aid from the public treasury." Read and laid on
the table. _Ibid._, p. 258.


~1826, March 14. United States Statute: Appropriation.~

"An Act making appropriations for the support of the navy," etc.

"For the agency on the coast of Africa, for receiving the negroes,"
etc., $32,000. _Statutes at Large_, IV. 140, 141.


~1827, March 2. United States Statute: Appropriation.~

"An Act making appropriations for the support of the Navy," etc.

"For the agency on the coast of Africa," etc., $56,710. _Ibid._, W. 206,
208.


~1827, March 11. Texas: Introduction of Slaves Prohibited.~

Constitution of the State of Coahuila and Texas. Preliminary
Provisions:--

Art. 13. "From and after the promulgation of the constitution in the
capital of each district, no one shall be born a slave in the state, and
after six months the introduction of slaves under any pretext shall not
be permitted." _Laws and Decrees of Coahuila and Texas_ (Houston, 1839),
p. 314.


~1827, Sept. 15. Texas: Decree against Slave-Trade.~

"The Congress of the State of Coahuila and Texas decrees as follows:"

Art. 1. All slaves to be registered.

Art. 2, 3. Births and deaths to be recorded.

Art. 4. "Those who introduce slaves, after the expiration of the term
specified in article 13 of the Constitution, shall be subject to the
penalties established by the general law of the 13th of July, 1824."
_Ibid._, pp. 78-9.


~1828, Feb. 25. Congress (House): Proposed Bill to Abolish African
Agency, etc.~

"Mr. McDuffie, from the Committee of Ways and Means, ... reported the
following bill:

"A bill to abolish the Agency of the United States on the Coast of
Africa, to provide other means of carrying into effect the laws
prohibiting the slave trade, and for other purposes." This bill was
amended so as to become the act of May 24, 1828 (see below). _House
Reports_, 21 Cong. 1 sess. III. No. 348, p. 278.


~1828, May 24. United States Statute: Appropriation.~

"An Act making an appropriation for the suppression of the slave trade."
_Statutes at Large_, IV. 302; _House Journal_, 20 Cong. 1 sess., House
Bill No. 190.


~1829, Jan. 28. Congress (House): Bill to Amend Act of 1807.~

The Committee on Commerce reported "a bill (No. 399) to amend an act,
entitled 'An act to prohibit the importation of slaves,'" etc. Referred
to Committee of the Whole. _House Journal_, 20 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 58, 84,
215. Cf. _Ibid._, 20 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 121, 135.


~1829, March 2. United States Statute: Appropriation.~

"An Act making additional appropriations for the support of the navy,"
etc.

"For the reimbursement of the marshal of Florida for expenses incurred
in the case of certain Africans who were wrecked on the coast of the
United States, and for the expense of exporting them to Africa,"
$16,000. _Statutes at Large_, IV. 353, 354.


~1830, April 7. Congress (House): Resolution against Slave-Trade.~

Mr. Mercer reported the following resolution:--

"_Resolved_, That the President of the United States be requested to
consult and negotiate with all the Governments where Ministers of the
United States are, or shall be accredited, on the means of effecting an
entire and immediate abolition of the African slave trade; and
especially, on the expediency, with that view, of causing it to be
universally denounced as piratical." Referred to Committee of the Whole;
no further action recorded. _House Journal_, 21 Cong. 1 sess. p. 512.


~1830, April 7. Congress (House): Proposition to Amend Act of March 3,
1819.~

Mr. Mercer, from the committee to which was referred the memorial of the
American Colonization Society, and also memorials, from the inhabitants
of Kentucky and Ohio, reported with a bill (No. 412) to amend "An act in
addition to the acts prohibiting the slave trade," passed March 3, 1819.
Read twice and referred to Committee of the Whole. _Ibid._


~1830, May 31. Congress (Statute): Appropriation.~

"An Act making a re-appropriation of a sum heretofore appropriated for
the suppression of the slave trade." _Statutes at Large_, IV. 425;
_Senate Journal_, 21 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 359, 360, 383; _House Journal_,
21 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 624, 808-11.


~1830. [Brazil: Prohibition of Slave-Trade.~

Slave-trade prohibited under severe penalties.]


~1831, 1833. [Great Britain and France: Treaty Granting Right of
Search.~

Convention between Great Britain and France granting a mutual limited
Right of Search on the East and West coasts of Africa, and on the coasts
of the West Indies and Brazil. _British and Foreign State Papers_,
1830-1, p. 641 ff; 1832-3, p. 286 ff.]


~1831, Feb. 16. Congress (House): Proposed Resolution on Slave-Trade.~

"Mr. Mercer moved to suspend the rule of the House in regard to motions,
for the purpose of enabling himself to submit a resolution requesting
the Executive to enter into negotiations with the maritime Powers of
Europe, to induce them to enact laws declaring the African slave trade
piracy, and punishing it as such." The motion was lost. Gales and
Seaton, _Register of Debates_, VII. 726.


~1831, March 2. United States Statute: Appropriation.~

"An Act making appropriations for the naval service," etc.

"For carrying into effect the acts for the suppression of the slave
trade," etc., $16,000. _Statutes at Large_, IV. 460, 462.


~1831, March 3. Congress (House): Resolution as to Treaties.~

"Mr. Mercer moved to suspend the rule to enable him to submit the
following resolution:

"_Resolved_, That the President of the United States be requested to
renew, and to prosecute from time to time, such negotiations with the
several maritime powers of Europe and America as he may deem expedient
for the effectual abolition of the African slave trade, and its ultimate
denunciation as piracy, under the laws of nations, by the consent of the
civilized world." The rule was suspended by a vote of 108 to 36, and the
resolution passed, 118 to 32. _House Journal_, 21 Cong. 2 sess. pp.
426-8.


~1833, Feb. 20. United States Statute: Appropriation.~

"An Act making appropriations for the naval service," etc.

" ... for carrying into effect the acts for the suppression of the slave
trade," etc., $5,000. _Statutes at Large_, IV. 614, 615.


~1833, August. Great Britain and France: Proposed Treaty with the United
States.~

British and French ministers simultaneously invited the United States to
accede to the Convention just concluded between them for the suppression
of the slave-trade. The Secretary of State, Mr. M'Lane, deferred answer
until the meeting of Congress, and then postponed negotiations on
account of the irritable state of the country on the slave question.
Great Britain had proposed that "A reciprocal right of search ... be
conceded by the United States, limited as to place, and subject to
specified restrictions. It is to be employed only in repressing the
Slave Trade, and to be exercised under a written and specific authority,
conferred on the Commander of the visiting ship." In the act of
accession, "it will be necessary that the right of search should be
extended to the coasts of the United States," and Great Britain will in
turn extend it to the British West Indies. This proposal was finally
refused, March 24, 1834, chiefly, as stated, because of the extension of
the Right of Search to the coasts of the United States. This part was
waived by Great Britain, July 7, 1834. On Sept. 12 the French Minister
joined in urging accession. On Oct. 4, 1834, Forsyth states that the
determination has "been definitely formed, not to make the United States
a party to any Convention on the subject of the Slave Trade."
_Parliamentary Papers_, 1835, Vol. LI., _Slave Trade_, Class B., pp.
84-92.


~1833, Dec. 23. Georgia: Slave-Trade Acts Amended.~

"An Act to reform, amend, and consolidate the penal laws of the State of
Georgia."

13th Division. "Offences relative to Slaves":--

Â§ 1. "If any person or persons shall bring, import, or introduce into
this State, or aid or assist, or knowingly become concerned or
interested, in bringing, importing, or introducing into this State,
either by land or by water, or in any manner whatever, any slave or
slaves, each and every such person or persons so offending, shall be
deemed principals in law, and guilty of a high misdemeanor, and ... on
conviction, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred
dollars each, for each and every slave, ... and imprisonment and labor
in the penitentiary for any time not less than one year, nor longer than
four years." Residents, however, may bring slaves for their own use, but
must register and swear they are not for sale, hire, mortgage, etc.

Â§ 6. Penalty for knowingly receiving such slaves, $500. Slightly amended
Dec. 23, 1836, e.g., emigrants were allowed to hire slaves out, etc.;
amended Dec. 19, 1849, so as to allow importation of slaves from "any
other slave holding State of this Union." Prince, _Digest_, pp. 619,
653, 812; Cobb, _Digest_, II. 1018.


~1834, Jan. 24. United States Statute: Appropriation.~

"An Act making appropriations for the naval service," etc.

"For carrying into effect the acts for the suppression of the slave
trade," etc., $5,000. _Statutes at Large_, IV. 670, 671.


~1836, March 17. Texas: African Slave-Trade Prohibited.~

Constitution of the Republic of Texas: General Provisions:--

Â§ 9. All persons of color who were slaves for life before coming to
Texas shall remain so. "Congress shall pass no laws to prohibit
emigrants from bringing their slaves into the republic with them, and
holding them by the same tenure by which such slaves were held in the
United States; ... the importation or admission of Africans or negroes
into this republic, excepting from the United States of America, is
forever prohibited, and declared to be piracy." _Laws of the Republic of
Texas_ (Houston, 1838), I. 19.


~1836, Dec. 21. Texas: Slave-Trade made Piracy.~

"An Act supplementary to an act, for the punishment of Crimes and
Misdemeanors."

Â§ 1. "_Be it enacted_ ..., That if any person or persons shall introduce
any African negro or negroes, contrary to the true intent and meaning of
the ninth section of the general provisions of the constitution, ...
except such as are from the United States of America, and had been held
as slaves therein, be considered guilty of piracy; and upon conviction
thereof, before any court having cognizance of the same, shall suffer
death, without the benefit of clergy."

Â§ 2. The introduction of Negroes from the United States of America,
except of those legally held as slaves there, shall be piracy. _Ibid._,
I. 197. Cf. _House Doc._, 27 Cong. 1 sess. No. 34, p. 42.


~1837, March 3. United States Statute: Appropriation.~

"An Act making appropriations for the naval service," etc.

"For carrying into effect the acts for the suppression of the slave
trade," etc., $11,413.57. _Statutes at Large_, V. 155, 157.


~1838, March 19. Congress (Senate): Slave-Trade with Texas, etc.~

"Mr. Morris submitted the following motion for consideration:

"_Resolved_, That the Committee on the Judiciary be instructed to
inquire whether the present laws of the United States, on the subject of
the slave trade, will prohibit that trade being carried on between
citizens of the United States and citizens of the Republic of Texas,
either by land or by sea; and whether it would be lawful in vessels
owned by citizens of that Republic, and not lawful in vessels owned by
citizens of this, or lawful in both, and by citizens of both countries;
and also whether a slave carried from the United States into a foreign
country, and brought back, on returning into the United States, is
considered a free person, or is liable to be sent back, if demanded, as
a slave, into that country from which he or she last came; and also
whether any additional legislation by Congress is necessary on any of
these subjects." March 20, the motion of Mr. Walker that this resolution
"lie on the table," was determined in the affirmative, 32 to 9. _Senate
Journal_, 25 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 297-8, 300.


~1839, Feb. 5. Congress (Senate): Bill to Amend Slave-Trade Acts.~

"Mr. Strange, on leave, and in pursuance of notice given, introduced a
bill to amend an act entitled an act to prohibit the importation of
slaves into any port in the jurisdiction of the United States; which was
read twice, and referred to the Committee on Commerce." March 1, the
Committee was discharged from further consideration of the bill.
_Congressional Globe_, 25 Cong. 3 sess. p. 172; _Senate Journal_, 25
Cong. 3 sess. pp. 200, 313.


~1839, Dec. 24. President Van Buren's Message.~

"It will be seen by the report of the Secretary of the navy respecting
the disposition of our ships of war, that it has been deemed necessary
to station a competent force on the coast of Africa, to prevent a
fraudulent use of our flag by foreigners.

"Recent experience has shown that the provisions in our existing laws
which relate to the sale and transfer of American vessels while abroad,
are extremely defective. Advantage has been taken of these defects to
give to vessels wholly belonging to foreigners, and navigating the
ocean, an apparent American ownership. This character has been so well
simulated as to afford them comparative security in prosecuting the
slave trade, a traffic emphatically denounced in our statutes, regarded
with abhorrence by our citizens, and of which the effectual suppression
is nowhere more sincerely desired than in the United States. These
circumstances make it proper to recommend to your early attention a
careful revision of these laws, so that ... the integrity and honor of
our flag may be carefully preserved." _House Journal_, 26 Cong. 1 sess.
pp. 117-8.


~1840, Jan. 3. Congress (Senate): Bill to Amend Act of 1807.~

"Agreeably to notice, Mr. Strange asked and obtained leave to bring in a
bill (Senate, No. 123) to amend an act entitled 'An act to prohibit the
importation of slaves into any port or place within the jurisdiction of
the United States from and after the 1st day of January, in the year
1808,' approved the 2d day of March, 1807; which was read the first and
second times, by unanimous consent, and referred to the Committee on the
Judiciary." Jan. 8, it was reported without amendment; May 11, it was
considered, and, on motion by Mr. King, "_Ordered_, That it lie on the
table." _Senate Journal_, 26 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 73, 87, 363.


~1840, May 4. Congress (Senate): Bill on Slave-Trade.~

"Mr. Davis, from the Committee on Commerce, reported a bill (Senate, No.
335) making further provision to prevent the abuse of the flag of the
United States, and the use of unauthorized papers in the foreign
slavetrade, and for other purposes." This passed the Senate, but was
dropped in the House. _Ibid._, pp. 356, 359, 440, 442; _House Journal_,
26 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 1138, 1228, 1257.


~1841, June 1. Congress (House): President Tyler's Message.~

"I shall also, at the proper season, invite your attention to the
statutory enactments for the suppression of the slave trade, which may
require to be rendered more efficient in their provisions. There is
reason to believe that the traffic is on the increase. Whether such
increase is to be ascribed to the abolition of slave labor in the
British possessions in our vicinity, and an attendant diminution in the
supply of those articles which enter into the general consumption of the
world, thereby augmenting the demand from other quarters, ... it were
needless to inquire. The highest considerations of public honor, as well
as the strongest promptings of humanity, require a resort to the most
vigorous efforts to suppress the trade." _House Journal_, 27 Cong. 1
sess. pp. 31, 184.


~1841, Dec. 7. President Tyler's Message.~

Though the United States is desirous to suppress the slave-trade, she
will not submit to interpolations into the maritime code at will by
other nations. This government has expressed its repugnance to the trade
by several laws. It is a matter for deliberation whether we will enter
upon treaties containing mutual stipulations upon the subject with other
governments. The United States will demand indemnity for all
depredations by Great Britain.

"I invite your attention to existing laws for the suppression of the
African slave trade, and recommend all such alterations as may give to
them greater force and efficacy. That the American flag is grossly
abused by the abandoned and profligate of other nations is but too
probable. Congress has, not long since, had this subject under its
consideration, and its importance well justifies renewed and anxious
attention." _House Journal_, 27 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 14-5, 86, 113.


~1841, Dec. 20. [Great Britain, Austria, Russia, Prussia, and France:
Quintuple Treaty.]~ _British and Foreign State Papers_, 1841-2, p. 269
ff.


~1842, Feb. 15. Right of Search: Cass's Protest.~

Cass writes to Webster, that, considering the fact that the signing of
the Quintuple Treaty would oblige the participants to exercise the Right
of Search denied by the United States, or to make a change in the
hitherto recognized law of nations, he, on his own responsibility,
addressed the following protest to the French Minister of Foreign
Affairs, M. Guizot:--

                                       "LEGATION OF THE UNITED STATES,
                                            "PARIS, FEBRUARY 13, 1842.

"SIR: The recent signature of a treaty, having for its object
the suppression of the African slave trade, by five of the powers of
Europe, and to which France is a party, is a fact of such general
notoriety that it may be assumed as the basis of any diplomatic
representations which the subject may fairly require."

The United States is no party to this treaty. She denies the Right of
Visitation which England asserts. [Quotes from the presidential message
of Dec. 7, 1841.] This principle is asserted by the treaty.

" ... The moral effect which such a union of five great powers, two of
which are eminently maritime, but three of which have perhaps never had
a vessel engaged in that traffic, is calculated to produce upon the
United States, and upon other nations who, like them, may be indisposed
to these combined movements, though it may be regretted, yet furnishes
no just cause of complaint. But the subject assumes another aspect when
they are told by one of the parties that their vessels are to be
forcibly entered and examined, in order to carry into effect these
stipulations. Certainly the American Government does not believe that
the high powers, contracting parties to this treaty, have any wish to
compel the United States, by force, to adopt their measures to its
provisions, or to adopt its stipulations ...; and they will see with
pleasure the prompt disavowal made by yourself, sir, in the name of your
country, ... of any intentions of this nature. But were it otherwise,
... They would prepare themselves with apprehension, indeed, but without
dismay--with regret, but with firmness--for one of those desperate
struggles which have sometimes occurred in the history of the world."

If, as England says, these treaties cannot be executed without visiting
United States ships, then France must pursue the same course. It is
hoped, therefore, that his Majesty will, before signing this treaty,
carefully examine the pretensions of England and their compatibility
with the law of nations and the honor of the United States. _Senate
Doc._, 27 Cong. 3 sess. II. No. 52, and IV. No. 223; 29 Cong. 1 sess.
VIII. No. 377, pp. 192-5.


~1842, Feb. 26. Mississippi: Resolutions on Creole Case.~

The following resolutions were referred to the Committee on Foreign
Affairs in the United States Congress, House of Representatives, May 10,
1842:

"Whereas, the right of search has never been yielded to Great Britain,"
and the brig Creole has not been surrendered by the British authorities,
etc., therefore,

Â§ 1. "_Be it resolved by the Legislature of the State of Mississippi_,
That ... the right of search cannot be conceded to Great Britain without
a manifest servile submission, unworthy a free nation....

Â§ 2. "_Resolved_, That any attempt to detain and search our vessels, by
British cruisers, should be held and esteemed an unjustifiable outrage
on the part of the Queen's Government; and that any such outrage, which
may have occurred since Lord Aberdeen's note to our envoy at the Court
of St. James, of date October thirteen, eighteen hundred and forty-one,
(if any,) may well be deemed, by our Government, just cause of war."

Â§ 3. "_Resolved_, That the Legislature of the State, in view of the late
murderous insurrection of the slaves on board the Creole, their
reception in a British port, the absolute connivance at their crimes,
manifest in the protection extended to them by the British authorities,
most solemnly declare their firm conviction that, if the conduct of
those authorities be submitted to, compounded for by the payment of
money, or in any other manner, or atoned for in any mode except by the
surrender of the actual criminals to the Federal Government, and the
delivery of the other identical slaves to their rightful owner or
owners, or his or their agents, the slaveholding States would have most
just cause to apprehend that the American flag is powerless to protect
American property; that the Federal Government is not sufficiently
energetic in the maintenance and preservation of their peculiar rights;
and that these rights, therefore, are in imminent danger."

Â§ 4. _Resolved_, That restitution should be demanded "at all hazards."
_House Doc._, 27 Cong. 2 sess. IV. No. 215.

~1842, March 21. Congress (House): Giddings's Resolutions.~

Mr. Giddings moved the following resolutions:--

Â§ 5. "_Resolved_, That when a ship belonging to the citizens of any
State of this Union leaves the waters and territory of such State, and
enters upon the high seas, the persons on board cease to be subject to
the slave laws of such State, and therefore are governed in their
relations to each other by, and are amenable to, the laws of the United
States."

Â§ 6. _Resolved_, That the slaves in the brig Creole are amenable only to
the laws of the United States.

Â§ 7. _Resolved_, That those slaves by resuming their natural liberty
violated no laws of the United States.

Â§ 8. _Resolved_, That all attempts to re-enslave them are
unconstitutional, etc.

Moved that these resolutions lie on the table; defeated, 53 to 125. Mr.
Giddings withdrew the resolutions. Moved to censure Mr. Giddings, and he
was finally censured. _House Journal_, 27 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 567-80.


~1842, May 10. Congress (House): Remonstrance of Mississippi against
Right of Search.~

"Mr. Gwin presented resolutions of the Legislature of the State of
Mississippi, against granting the right of search to Great Britain for
the purpose of suppressing the African slave trade; urging the
Government to demand of the British Government redress and restitution
in relation to the case of the brig Creole and the slaves on board."
Referred to the Committee on Foreign Affairs. _House Journal_, 27 Cong.
2 sess. p. 800.


~1842, Aug. 4. United States Statute: Appropriation.~

"An Act making appropriations for the naval service," etc.

"For carrying into effect the acts for the suppression of the slave
trade," etc. $10,543.42. _Statutes at Large_, V. 500, 501.


~1842, Nov. 10. Joint-Cruising Treaty with Great Britain.~

"Treaty to settle and define boundaries; for the final suppression of
the African slave-trade; and for the giving up of criminals fugitive
from justice. Concluded August 9, 1842; ratifications exchanged at
London October 13, 1842; proclaimed November 10, 1842." Articles VIII.,
and IX. Ratified by the Senate by a vote of 39 to 9, after several
unsuccessful attempts to amend it. _U.S. Treaties and Conventions_
(1889), pp. 436-7; _Senate Exec. Journal_, VI. 118-32.


~1842, Dec. 7. President Tyler's Message.~

The treaty of Ghent binds the United States and Great Britain to the
suppression of the slave-trade. The Right of Search was refused by the
United States, and our Minister in France for that reason protested
against the Quintuple Treaty; his conduct had the approval of the
administration. On this account the eighth article was inserted, causing
each government to keep a flotilla in African waters to enforce the
laws. If this should be done by all the powers, the trade would be swept
from the ocean. _House Journal_, 27 Cong. 3 sess. pp. 16-7.


~1843, Feb. 22. Congress (Senate): Appropriation Opposed.~

Motion by Mr. Benton, during debate on naval appropriations, to strike
out appropriation "for the support of Africans recaptured on the coast
of Africa or elsewhere, and returned to Africa by the armed vessels of
the United States, $5,000." Lost; similar proposition by Bagby, lost.
Proposition to strike out appropriation for squadron, lost. March 3,
bill becomes a law, with appropriation for Africans, but without that
for squadron. _Congressional Globe_, 27 Cong. 3 sess. pp. 328, 331-6;
_Statutes at Large_, V. 615.


~1845, Feb. 20. President Tyler's Special Message to Congress.~

Message on violations of Brazilian slave-trade laws by Americans. _House
Journal_, 28 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 425, 463; _House Doc._, 28 Cong. 2 sess.
IV. No. 148. Cf. _Ibid._, 29 Cong. 1 sess. III. No. 43.


~1846, Aug. 10. United States Statute: Appropriation.~

"For carrying into effect the acts for the suppression of the slave
trade, including the support of recaptured Africans, and their removal
to their country, twenty-five thousand dollars." _Statutes at Large_,
IX. 96.


~1849, Dec. 4. President Taylor's Message.~

"Your attention is earnestly invited to an amendment of our existing
laws relating to the African slave-trade, with a view to the effectual
suppression of that barbarous traffic. It is not to be denied that this
trade is still, in part, carried on by means of vessels built in the
United States, and owned or navigated by some of our citizens." _House
Exec. Doc._, 31 Cong. 1 sess. III. No. 5, pp. 7-8.


~1850, Aug. 1. Congress (House): Bill for War Steamers.~

"A bill (House, No. 367) to establish a line of war steamers to the
coast of Africa for the suppression of the slave trade and the promotion
of commerce and colonization." Read twice, and referred to Committee of
the Whole. _House Journal_, 31 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 1022, 1158, 1217.


~1850, Dec. 16. Congress (House): Treaty of Washington.~

"Mr. Burt, by unanimous consent, introduced a joint resolution (No. 28)
'to terminate the eighth article of the treaty between the United
States and Great Britain concluded at Washington the ninth day of
August, 1842.'" Read twice, and referred to the Committee on Naval
Affairs. _Ibid._, 31 Cong. 2 sess. p. 64.


~1851, Jan. 22. Congress (Senate): Resolution on Sea Letters.~

"The following resolution, submitted by Mr. Clay the 20th instant, came
up for consideration:--

"_Resolved_, That the Committee on Commerce be instructed to inquire
into the expediency of making more effectual provision by law to prevent
the employment of American vessels and American seamen in the African
slave trade, and especially as to the expediency of granting sea letters
or other evidence of national character to American vessels clearing out
of the ports of the empire of Brazil for the western coast of Africa."
Agreed to. _Congressional Globe_, 31 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 304-9; _Senate
Journal_, 31 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 95, 102-3.


~1851, Feb. 19. Congress (Senate): Bill on Slave-Trade.~

"A bill (Senate, No. 472) concerning the intercourse and trade of
vessels of the United States with certain places on the eastern and
western coasts of Africa, and for other purposes." Read once. _Senate
Journal_, 31 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 42, 45, 84, 94, 159, 193-4;
_Congressional Globe_, 31 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 246-7.


~1851, Dec. 3. Congress (House): Bill to Amend Act of 1807.~

Mr. Giddings gave notice of a bill to repeal Â§Â§ 9 and 10 of the act to
prohibit the importation of slaves, etc. from and after Jan. 1, 1808.
_House Journal_, 32 Cong. 1 sess. p. 42. Cf. _Ibid._, 33 Cong. 1 sess.
p. 147.


~1852, Feb. 5. Alabama: Illegal Importations.~

By code approved on this date:--

Â§Â§ 2058-2062. If slaves have been imported contrary to law, they are to
be sold, and one fourth paid to the agent or informer and the residue to
the treasury. An agent is to be appointed to take charge of such
slaves, who is to give bond. Pending controversy, he may hire the slaves
out. Ormond, _Code of Alabama_, pp. 392-3.


~1853, March 3. Congress (Senate): Appropriation Proposed.~

A bill making appropriations for the naval service for the year ending
June 30, 1854. Mr. Underwood offered the following amendment:--

"For executing the provisions of the act approved 3d of March, 1819,
entitled 'An act in addition to the acts prohibiting the slave trade,'
$20,000." Amendment agreed to, and bill passed. It appears, however, to
have been subsequently amended in the House, and the appropriation does
not stand in the final act. _Congressional Globe_, 32 Cong. 2 sess. p.
1072; _Statutes at Large_, X. 214.


~1854, May 22. Congress (Senate): West India Slave-Trade.~

Mr. Clayton presented the following resolution, which was unanimously
agreed to:--

"_Resolved_, That the Committee on Foreign Relations be instructed to
inquire into the expediency of providing by law for such restrictions on
the power of American consuls residing in the Spanish West India islands
to issue sea letters on the transfer of American vessels in those
islands, as will prevent the abuse of the American flag in protecting
persons engaged in the African slave trade." June 26, 1854, this
committee reported "a bill (Senate, No. 416) for the more effectual
suppression of the slave-trade in American built vessels." Passed
Senate, postponed in House. _Senate Journal_, 33 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 404,
457-8, 472-3, 476; _House Journal_, 33 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 1093, 1332-3;
_Congressional Globe_, 33 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 1257-61, 1511-3, 1591-3,
2139.


~1854, May 29. Congress (Senate): Treaty of Washington.~

_Resolved_, "that, in the opinion of the Senate, it is expedient, and in
conformity with the interests and sound policy of the United States,
that the eighth article of the treaty between this government and Great
Britain, of the 9th of August, 1842, should be abrogated." Introduced by
Slidell, and favorably reported from Committee on Foreign Relations in
Executive Session, June 13, 1854. _Senate Journal_, 34 Cong. 1-2 sess.
pp. 396, 695-8; _Senate Reports_, 34 Cong. 1 sess. I. No. 195.


~1854, June 21. Congress (Senate): Bill Regulating Navigation.~

"Mr. Seward asked and obtained leave to bring in a bill (Senate, No.
407) to regulate navigation to the coast of Africa in vessels owned by
citizens of the United States, in certain cases; which was read and
passed to a second reading." June 22, ordered to be printed. _Senate
Journal_, 33 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 448, 451; _Congressional Globe_, 33 Cong.
1 sess. pp. 1456, 1461, 1472.


~1854, June 26. Congress (Senate): Bill to Suppress Slave-Trade.~

"A bill for the more effectual suppression of the slave trade in
American built vessels." See references to May 22, 1854, above.


~1856, June 23. Congress (House): Proposition to Amend Act of 1818.~

Notice given of a bill to amend the Act of April 20, 1818. _House
Journal_, 34 Cong. 1 sess. II. 1101.


~1856, Aug. 18. United States Statute: Appropriation.~

To carry out the Act of March 3, 1819, and subsequent acts, $8,000.
_Statutes at Large_, XI. 90.


~1856, Nov. 24. South Carolina: Governor's Message.~

Governor Adams, in his annual message to the legislature, said:--

"It is apprehended that the opening of this trade [_i.e._, the
slave-trade] will lessen the value of slaves, and ultimately destroy the
institution. It is a sufficient answer to point to the fact, that
unrestricted immigration has not diminished the value of labor in the
Northwestern section of the confederacy. The cry there is, want of
labor, notwithstanding capital has the pauperism of the old world to
press into its grinding service. If we cannot supply the demand for
slave labor, then we must expect to be supplied with a species of labor
we do not want, and which is, from the very nature of things,
antagonistic to our institutions. It is much better that our drays
should be driven by slaves--that our factories should be worked by
slaves--that our hotels should be served by slaves--that our locomotives
should be manned by slaves, than that we should be exposed to the
introduction, from any quarter, of a population alien to us by birth,
training, and education, and which, in the process of time, must lead to
that conflict between capital and labor, 'which makes it so difficult to
maintain free institutions in all wealthy and highly civilized nations
where such institutions as ours do not exist.' In all slaveholding
States, true policy dictates that the superior race should direct, and
the inferior perform all menial service. Competition between the white
and black man for this service, may not disturb Northern sensibility,
but it does not exactly suit our latitude." _South Carolina House
Journal_, 1856, p. 36; Cluskey, _Political Text-Book_, 14 edition, p.
585.


~1856, Dec. 15. Congress (House): Reopening of Slave-Trade.~

"_Resolved_, That this House of Representatives regards all suggestions
and propositions of every kind, by whomsoever made, for a revival of the
African slave trade, as shocking to the moral sentiment of the
enlightened portion of mankind; and that any action on the part of
Congress conniving at or legalizing that horrid and inhuman traffic
would justly subject the government and citizens of the United States to
the reproach and execration of all civilized and Christian people
throughout the world." Offered by Mr. Etheridge; agreed to, 152 to 57.
_House Journal_, 34 Cong. 3 sess. pp. 105-11; _Congressional Globe_, 34
Cong. 3 sess. pp. 123-5, and Appendix, pp. 364-70.


~1856, Dec. 15. Congress (House): Reopening of Slave-Trade.~

"_Resolved_, That it is inexpedient to repeal the laws prohibiting the
African slave trade." Offered by Mr. Orr; not voted upon. _Congressional
Globe_, 34 Cong. 3 sess. p. 123.


~1856, Dec. 15. Congress (House): Reopening of Slave-Trade.~

"_Resolved_, That it is inexpedient, unwise, and contrary to the settled
policy of the United States, to repeal the laws prohibiting the African
slave trade." Offered by Mr. Orr; agreed to, 183 to 8. _House Journal_,
34 Cong. 3 sess. pp. 111-3; _Congressional Globe_, 34 Cong. 3 sess. pp.
125-6.


~1856, Dec. 15. Congress (House): Reopening of Slave-Trade.~

"_Resolved_, That the House of Representatives, expressing, as they
believe, public opinion both North and South, are utterly opposed to the
reopening of the slave trade." Offered by Mr. Boyce; not voted upon.
_Congressional Globe_, 34 Cong. 3 sess. p. 125.


~1857. South Carolina: Report of Legislative Committee.~

Special committee of seven on the slave-trade clause in the Governor's
message report: majority report of six members, favoring the reopening
of the African slave-trade; minority report of Pettigrew, opposing it.
_Report of the Special Committee_, etc., published in 1857.


~1857, March 3. United States Statute: Appropriation.~

To carry out the Act of March 3, 1819, and subsequent acts, $8,000.
_Statutes at Large_, XI. 227; _House Journal_, 34 Cong. 3 sess. p. 397.
Cf. _House Exec. Doc._, 34 Cong. 3 sess. IX. No. 70.


~1858, March (?). Louisiana: Bill to Import Africans.~

Passed House; lost in Senate by two votes. Cf. _Congressional Globe_, 35
Cong. 1 sess. p. 1362.


~1858, Dec. 6. President Buchanan's Message.~

"The truth is, that Cuba in its existing colonial condition, is a
constant source of injury and annoyance to the American people. It is
the only spot in the civilized world where the African slave trade is
tolerated; and we are bound by treaty with Great Britain to maintain a
naval force on the coast of Africa, at much expense both of life and
treasure, solely for the purpose of arresting slavers bound to that
island. The late serious difficulties between the United States and
Great Britain respecting the right of search, now so happily terminated,
could never have arisen if Cuba had not afforded a market for slaves. As
long as this market shall remain open, there can be no hope for the
civilization of benighted Africa....

"It has been made known to the world by my predecessors that the United
States have, on several occasions, endeavored to acquire Cuba from Spain
by honorable negotiation. If this were accomplished, the last relic of
the African slave trade would instantly disappear. We would not, if we
could, acquire Cuba in any other manner. This is due to our national
character.... This course we shall ever pursue, unless circumstances
should occur, which we do not now anticipate, rendering a departure from
it clearly justifiable, under the imperative and overruling law of
self-preservation." _House Exec. Doc._, 35 Cong. 2 sess. II. No. 2, pp.
14-5. See also _Ibid._, pp. 31-3.


~1858, Dec. 23. Congress (House): Resolution on Slave-Trade.~

On motion of Mr. Farnsworth,

"_Resolved_, That the Committee on Naval Affairs be requested to inquire
and report to this House if any, and what, further legislation is
necessary on the part of the United States to fully carry out and
perform the stipulations contained in the eighth article of the treaty
with Great Britain (known as the 'Ashburton treaty') for the suppression
of the slave trade." _House Journal_, 35 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 115-6.


~1859, Jan. 5. Congress (Senate): Resolution on Slave-Trade.~

On motion of Mr. Seward, Dec. 21, 1858,

"_Resolved_, That the Committee on the Judiciary inquire whether any
amendments to existing laws ought to be made for the suppression of the
African slave trade." _Senate Journal_, 35 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 80, 108,
115.


~1859, Jan. 13. Congress (Senate): Bill on Slave-Trade.~

Mr. Seward introduced "a bill (Senate, No. 510) in addition to the acts
which prohibit the slave trade." Referred to committee, reported, and
dropped. _Ibid._, pp. 134, 321.


~1859, Jan. 31. Congress (House): Reopening of Slave-Trade.~

"Mr. Kilgore moved that the rules be suspended, so as to enable him to
submit the following preamble and resolutions, viz:

"Whereas the laws prohibiting the African slave trade have become a
topic of discussion with newspaper writers and political agitators, many
of them boldly denouncing these laws as unwise in policy and disgraceful
in their provisions, and insisting on the justice and propriety of their
repeal, and the revival of the odious traffic in African slaves; and
whereas recent demonstrations afford strong reasons to apprehend that
said laws are to be set at defiance, and their violation openly
countenanced and encouraged by a portion of the citizens of some of the
States of this Union; and whereas it is proper in view of said facts
that the sentiments of the people's representatives in Congress should
be made public in relation thereto: Therefore--

"_Resolved_, That while we recognize no right on the part of the federal
government, or any other law-making power, save that of the States
wherein it exists, to interfere with or disturb the institution of
domestic slavery where it is established or protected by State
legislation, we do hold that Congress has power to prohibit the foreign
traffic, and that no legislation can be too thorough in its measures,
nor can any penalty known to the catalogue of modern punishment for
crime be too severe against a traffic so inhuman and unchristian.

"_Resolved_, That the laws in force against said traffic are founded
upon the broadest principles of philanthropy, religion, and humanity;
that they should remain unchanged, except so far as legislation may be
needed to render them more efficient; that they should be faithfully and
promptly executed by our government, and respected by all good citizens.

"_Resolved_, That the Executive should be sustained and commended for
any proper efforts whenever and wherever made to enforce said laws, and
to bring to speedy punishment the wicked violators thereof, and all
their aiders and abettors."

Failed of the two-thirds vote necessary to suspend the rules--the vote
being 115 to 84--and was dropped. _House Journal_, 35 Cong. 2 sess. pp.
298-9.


~1859, March 3. United States Statute: Appropriation.~

To carry out the Act of March 3, 1819, and subsequent acts, and to pay
expenses already incurred, $75,000. _Statutes at Large_, XI. 404.


~1859, Dec. 19. President Buchanan's Message.~

"All lawful means at my command have been employed, and shall continue
to be employed, to execute the laws against the African slave trade.
After a most careful and rigorous examination of our coasts, and a
thorough investigation of the subject, we have not been able to discover
that any slaves have been imported into the United States except the
cargo by the Wanderer, numbering between three and four hundred. Those
engaged in this unlawful enterprise have been rigorously prosecuted, but
not with as much success as their crimes have deserved. A number of them
are still under prosecution. [Here follows a history of our slave-trade
legislation.]

"These acts of Congress, it is believed, have, with very rare and
insignificant exceptions, accomplished their purpose. For a period of
more than half a century there has been no perceptible addition to the
number of our domestic slaves.... Reopen the trade, and it would be
difficult to determine whether the effect would be more deleterious on
the interests of the master, or on those of the native born slave, ..."
_Senate Exec. Doc._, 36 Cong. 1 sess. I. No. 2, pp. 5-8.


~1860, March 20. Congress (Senate): Proposed Resolution.~

"Mr. Wilson submitted the following resolution; which was considered, by
unanimous consent, and agreed to:--

"_Resolved_, That the Committee on the Judiciary be instructed to
inquire into the expediency of so amending the laws of the United States
in relation to the suppression of the African slave trade as to provide
a penalty of imprisonment for life for a participation in such trade,
instead of the penalty of forfeiture of life, as now provided; and also
an amendment of such laws as will include in the punishment for said
offense all persons who fit out or are in any way connected with or
interested in fitting out expeditions or vessels for the purpose of
engaging in such slave trade." _Senate Journal_, 36 Cong. 1 sess. p.
274.


~1860, March 20. Congress (Senate): Right of Search.~

"Mr. Wilson asked, and by unanimous consent obtained, leave to bring in
a joint resolution (Senate, No. 20) to secure the right of search on the
coast of Africa, for the more effectual suppression of the African slave
trade." Read twice, and referred to Committee on Foreign Relations.
_Ibid._


~1860, March 20. Congress (Senate): Steam Vessels for Slave-Trade.~

"Mr. Wilson asked, and by unanimous consent obtained, leave to bring in
a bill (Senate, No. 296) for the construction of five steam screw
sloops-of-war, for service on the African coast." Read twice, and
referred to Committee on Naval Affairs; May 23, reported with an
amendment. _Ibid._, pp. 274, 494-5.


~1860 March 26. Congress (House): Proposed Resolutions.~

"Mr. Morse submitted ... the following resolutions; which were read and
committed to the Committee of the Whole House on the state of the Union,
viz:

"_Resolved_, That for the more effectual suppression of the African
slave trade the treaty of 1842 ..., requiring each country to keep
_eighty_ guns on the coast of Africa for that purpose, should be so
changed as to require a specified and sufficient number of small
steamers and fast sailing brigs or schooners to be kept on said
coast....

"_Resolved_, That as the African slave trade appears to be rapidly
increasing, some effective mode of identifying the nationality of a
vessel on the coast of Africa suspected of being in the slave trade or
of wearing false colors should be immediately adopted and carried into
effect by the leading maritime nations of the earth; and that the
government of the United States has thus far, by refusing to aid in
establishing such a system, shown a strange neglect of one of the best
means of suppressing said trade.

"_Resolved_, That the African slave trade is against the moral sentiment
of mankind and a crime against human nature; and that as the most highly
civilized nations have made it a criminal offence or piracy under their
own municipal laws, it ought at once and without hesitation to be
declared a crime by the code of international law; and that ... the
President be requested to open negotiations on this subject with the
leading powers of Europe." ... _House Journal_, 36 Cong. 1 sess. I.
588-9.


~1860, April 16. Congress (Senate): Bill on Slave-Trade.~

"Mr. Wilson asked, and by unanimous consent obtained, leave to bring in
a bill (Senate, No. 408) for the more effectual suppression of the slave
trade." Bill read twice, and ordered to lie on the table; May 21,
referred to Committee on the Judiciary, and printed. _Senate Journal_,
36 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 394, 485; _Congressional Globe_, 36 Cong. 1 sess.
pp. 1721, 2207-11.


~1860, May 21. Congress (House): Buyers of Imported Negroes.~

"Mr. Wells submitted the following resolution, and debate arising
thereon, it lies over under the rule, viz:

"_Resolved_, That the Committee on the Judiciary be instructed to report
forthwith a bill providing that any person purchasing any negro or other
person imported into this country in violation of the laws for
suppressing the slave trade, shall not by reason of said purchase
acquire any title to said negro or person; and where such purchase is
made with a knowledge that such negro or other person has been so
imported, shall forfeit not less than one thousand dollars, and be
punished by imprisonment for a term not less than six months." _House
Journal_, 36 Cong. 1 sess. II. 880.


~1860, May 26. United States Statute: Appropriation.~

To carry out the Act of March 3, 1819, and subsequent acts, $40,000.
_Statutes at Large_, XII. 21.


~1860, June 16. United States Statute: Additional Act to Act of 1819.~

"An Act to amend an Act entitled 'An Act in addition to the Acts
Prohibiting the Slave Trade.'" _Ibid._, XII. 40-1; _Senate Journal_, 36
Cong. 1 sess., Senate Bill No. 464.


~1860, July 11. Great Britain: Proposed Co-operation.~

Lord John Russell suggested for the suppression of the trade:--

"1st. A systematic plan of cruising on the coast of Cuba by the vessels
of Great Britain, Spain, and the United States.

"2d. Laws of registration and inspection in the Island of Cuba, by
which the employment of slaves, imported contrary to law, might be
detected by the Spanish authorities.

"3d. A plan of emigration from China, regulated by the agents of
European nations, in conjunction with the Chinese authorities."
President Buchanan refused to co-operate on this plan. _House Exec.
Doc._, 36 Cong. 2 sess. IV. No. 7, pp. 441-3, 446-8.


~1860, Dec. 3. President Buchanan's Message.~

"It is with great satisfaction I communicate the fact that since the
date of my last annual message not a single slave has been imported into
the United States in violation of the laws prohibiting the African slave
trade. This statement is founded upon a thorough examination and
investigation of the subject. Indeed, the spirit which prevailed some
time since among a portion of our fellow-citizens in favor of this trade
seems to have entirely subsided." _Senate Exec. Doc._, 36 Cong. 2 sess.
I. No. 1, p. 24.


~1860, Dec. 12. Congress (House): Proposition to Amend Constitution.~

Mr. John Cochrane's resolution:--

"The migration or importation of slaves into the United States or any of
the Territories thereof, from any foreign country, is hereby
prohibited." _House Journal_, 36 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 61-2; _Congressional
Globe_, 36 Cong. 2 sess. p. 77.


~1860, Dec. 24. Congress (Senate): Bill on Slave-Trade.~

"Mr. Wilson asked, and by unanimous consent obtained, leave to bring in
a bill (Senate, No. 529) for the more effectual suppression of the slave
trade." Read twice, and referred to Committee on the Judiciary; not
mentioned again. _Senate Journal_, 36 Cong. 2 sess. p. 62;
_Congressional Globe_, 36 Cong. 2 sess. p. 182.


~1861, Jan. 7. Congress (House): Proposition to Amend Constitution.~

Mr. Etheridge's resolution:--

Â§ 5. "The migration or importation of persons held to service or labor
for life, or a term of years, into any of the States, or the Territories
belonging to the United States, is perpetually prohibited; and Congress
shall pass all laws necessary to make said prohibition effective."
_Congressional Globe_, 36 Cong. 2 sess. p. 279.


~1861, Jan. 23. Congress (House): Proposition to Amend Constitution.~

Resolution of Mr. Morris of Pennsylvania:--"Neither Congress nor a
Territorial Legislature shall make any law respecting slavery or
involuntary servitude, except as a punishment for crime; but Congress
may pass laws for the suppression of the African slave trade, and the
rendition of fugitives from service or labor in the States." Mr. Morris
asked to have it printed, that he might at the proper time move it as an
amendment to the report of the select committee of thirty-three. It was
ordered to be printed. _Ibid._, p. 527.


~1861, Feb. 1. Congress (House): Proposition to Amend Constitution.~

Resolution of Mr. Kellogg of Illinois:--

Â§ 16. "The migration or importation of persons held to service or
involuntary servitude into any State, Territory, or place within the
United States, from any place or country beyond the limits of the United
States or Territories thereof, is forever prohibited." Considered Feb.
27, 1861, and lost. _Ibid._, pp. 690, 1243, 1259-60.


~1861, Feb. 8. Confederate States of America: Importation Prohibited.~

Constitution for the Provisional Government of the Confederate States of
America, Article I. Section 7:--

"1. The importation of African negroes from any foreign country other
than the slave-holding States of the United States, is hereby forbidden;
and Congress are required to pass such laws as shall effectually prevent
the same.

"2. The Congress shall also have power to prohibit the introduction of
slaves from any State not a member of this Confederacy." March 11, 1861,
this article was placed in the permanent Constitution. The first line
was changed so as to read "negroes of the African race." _C.S.A.
Statutes at Large, 1861-2_, pp. 3, 15.


~1861, Feb. 9. Confederate States of America: Statutory Prohibition.~

"_Be it enacted by the Confederate States of America in Congress
assembled_, That all the laws of the United States of America in force
and in use in the Confederate States of America on the first day of
November last, and not inconsistent with the Constitution of the
Confederate States, be and the same are hereby continued in force until
altered or repealed by the Congress." _Ibid._, p. 27.


~1861, Feb. 19. United States Statute: Appropriation.~

To supply deficiencies in the fund hitherto appropriated to carry out
the Act of March 3, 1819, and subsequent acts, $900,000. _Statutes at
Large_, XII. 132.


~1861, March 2. United States Statute: Appropriation.~

To carry out the Act of March 3, 1819, and subsequent acts, and to
provide compensation for district attorneys and marshals, $900,000.
_Ibid._, XII. 218-9.


~1861, Dec. 3. President Lincoln's Message.~

"The execution of the laws for the suppression of the African slave
trade has been confided to the Department of the Interior. It is a
subject of gratulation that the efforts which have been made for the
suppression of this inhuman traffic have been recently attended with
unusual success. Five vessels being fitted out for the slave trade have
been seized and condemned. Two mates of vessels engaged in the trade,
and one person in equipping a vessel as a slaver, have been convicted
and subjected to the penalty of fine and imprisonment, and one captain,
taken with a cargo of Africans on board his vessel, has been convicted
of the highest grade of offence under our laws, the punishment of which
is death." _Senate Exec. Doc._, 37 Cong. 2 sess. I. No. 1, p. 13.


~1862, Jan. 27. Congress (Senate): Bill on Slave-Trade.~

"Agreeably to notice Mr. Wilson, of Massachusetts, asked and obtained
leave to bring in a bill (Senate, No. 173), for the more effectual
suppression of the slave trade." Read twice, and referred to Committee
on the Judiciary; Feb. 11, 1863, reported adversely, and postponed
indefinitely. _Senate Journal_, 37 Cong. 2 sess. p. 143; 37 Cong. 3
sess. pp. 231-2.


~1862, March 14. United States Statute: Appropriation.~

For compensation to United States marshals, district attorneys, etc.,
for services in the suppression of the slave-trade, so much of the
appropriation of March 2, 1861, as may be expedient and proper, not
exceeding in all $10,000. _Statutes at Large_, XII. 368-9.


~1862, March 25. United States Statute: Prize Law.~

"An Act to facilitate Judicial Proceedings in Adjudications upon
Captured Property, and for the better Administration of the Law of
Prize." Applied to captures under the slave-trade law. _Ibid._, XII.
374-5; _Congressional Globe_, 37 Cong. 2 sess., Appendix, pp. 346-7.


~1862, June 7. Great Britain: Treaty of 1862.~

"Treaty for the suppression of the African slave trade. Concluded at
Washington April 7, 1862; ratifications exchanged at London May 20,
1862; proclaimed June 7, 1862." Ratified unanimously by the Senate.
_U.S. Treaties and Conventions_ (1889), pp. 454-66. See also _Senate
Exec. Journal_, XII. pp. 230, 231, 240, 254, 391, 400, 403.


~1862, July 11. United States Statute: Treaty of 1862 Carried into
Effect.~

"An Act to carry into Effect the Treaty between the United States and
her Britannic Majesty for the Suppression of the African Slave-Trade."
_Statutes at Large_, XII. 531; _Senate Journal_ and _House Journal_,
37 Cong. 2 sess., Senate Bill No. 352.


~1862, July 17. United States Statute: Former Acts Amended.~

"An Act to amend an Act entitled 'An Act to amend an Act entitled "An
Act in Addition to the Acts prohibiting the Slave Trade."'" _Statutes at
Large_, XII. 592-3; _Senate Journal_ and _House Journal_, 37 Cong. 2
sess., Senate Bill No. 385.


~1863, Feb. 4. United States Statute: Appropriation.~

To carry out the treaty with Great Britain, proclaimed July 11, 1862,
$17,000. _Statutes at Large_, XII. 639.


~1863, March 3. Congress: Joint Resolution.~

"Joint Resolution respecting the Compensation of the Judges and so
forth, under the Treaty with Great Britain and other Persons employed in
the Suppression of the Slave Trade." _Statutes at Large_, XII. 829.


~1863, April 22. Great Britain: Treaty of 1862 Amended.~

"Additional article to the treaty for the suppression of the African
slave trade of April 7, 1862." Concluded February 17, 1863;
ratifications exchanged at London April 1, 1863; proclaimed April 22,
1863.

Right of Search extended. _U.S. Treaties and Conventions_ (1889), pp.
466-7.


~1863, Dec. 17. Congress (House): Resolution on Coastwise Slave-Trade.~

Mr. Julian introduced a bill to repeal portions of the Act of March 2,
1807, relative to the coastwise slave-trade. Read twice, and referred to
Committee on the Judiciary. _Congressional Globe_, 38 Cong. 1 sess. p.
46.


~1864, July 2. United States Statute: Coastwise Slave-Trade Prohibited
Forever.~

Â§ 9 of Appropriation Act repeals Â§Â§ 8 and 9 of Act of 1807. _Statutes at
Large_, XIII. 353.


~1864, Dec. 7. Great Britain: International Proposition.~

"The crime of trading in human beings has been for many years branded by
the reprobation of all civilized nations. Still the atrocious traffic
subsists, and many persons flourish on the gains they have derived from
that polluted source.

"Her Majesty's government, contemplating, on the one hand, with
satisfaction the unanimous abhorrence which the crime inspires, and, on
the other hand, with pain and disgust the slave-trading speculations
which still subist [_sic_], have come to the conclusion that no measure
would be so effectual to put a stop to these wicked acts as the
punishment of all persons who can be proved to be guilty of carrying
slaves across the sea. Her Majesty's government, therefore, invite the
government of the United States to consider whether it would not be
practicable, honorable, and humane--

"1st. To make a general declaration, that the governments who are
parties to it denounce the slave trade as piracy.

"2d. That the aforesaid governments should propose to their legislatures
to affix the penalties of piracy already existing in their
laws--provided, only, that the penalty in this case be that of death--to
all persons, being subjects or citizens of one of the contracting
powers, who shall be convicted in a court which takes cognizance of
piracy, of being concerned in carrying human beings across the sea for
the purpose of sale, or for the purpose of serving as slaves, in any
country or colony in the world." Signed,
                                                        "RUSSELL."

Similar letters were addressed to France, Spain, Portugal, Austria,
Prussia, Italy, Netherlands, and Russia. _Diplomatic Correspondence_,
1865, pt. ii. pp. 4, 58-9, etc.


~1865, Jan. 24. United States Statute: Appropriation.~

To carry out the treaty with Great Britain, proclaimed July 11, 1862,
$17,000. _Statutes at Large_, XIII. 424.


~1866, April 7. United States Statute: Compensation to Marshals, etc.~

For additional compensation to United States marshals, district
attorneys, etc., for services in the suppression of the slave-trade, so
much of the appropriation of March 2, 1861, as may be expedient and
proper, not exceeding in all $10,000; and also so much as may be
necessary to pay the salaries of judges and the expenses of mixed
courts. _Ibid._, XIV. 23.


~1866, July 25. United States Statute: Appropriation.~

To carry out the treaty with Great Britain, proclaimed July 11, 1862,
$17,000. _Ibid._, XIV. 226.


~1867, Feb. 28. United States Statute: Appropriation.~

To carry out the treaty with Great Britain, proclaimed July 11, 1862,
$17,000. _Ibid._, XIV. 414-5.


~1868, March 30. United States Statute: Appropriation.~

To carry out the treaty with Great Britain, proclaimed July 11, 1862,
$12,500. _Ibid._, XV. 58.


~1869, Jan. 6. Congress (House): Abrogation of Treaty of 1862.~

Mr. Kelsey asked unanimous consent to introduce the following
resolution:--

"Whereas the slave trade has been practically suppressed; and whereas by
our treaty with Great Britain for the suppression of the slave trade
large appropriations are annually required to carry out the provisions
thereof: Therefore,

"_Resolved_, That the Committee on Foreign Affairs are hereby instructed
to inquire into the expediency of taking proper steps to secure the
abrogation or modification of the treaty with Great Britain for the
suppression of the slave trade." Mr. Arnell objected. _Congressional
Globe_, 40 Cong. 3 sess. p. 224.


~1869, March 3. United States Statute: Appropriation.~

To carry out the treaty with Great Britain, proclaimed July 11, 1862,
$12,500; provided that the salaries of judges be paid only on condition
that they reside where the courts are held, and that Great Britain be
asked to consent to abolish mixed courts. _Statutes at Large_, XV. 321.


~1870, April 22. Congress (Senate): Bill to Repeal Act of 1803.~

Senate Bill No. 251, to repeal an act entitled "An act to prevent the
importation of certain persons into certain States where by the laws
thereof their admission is prohibited." Mr. Sumner said that the bill
had passed the Senate once, and that he hoped it would now pass. Passed;
title amended by adding "approved February 28, 1803;" June 29, bill
passed over in House; July 14, consideration again postponed on Mr.
Woodward's objection. _Congressional Globe_, 41 Cong. 2 sess. pp. 2894,
2932, 4953, 5594.


~1870, Sept. 16. Great Britain: Additional Treaty.~

"Additional convention to the treaty of April 7, 1862, respecting the
African slave trade." Concluded June 3, 1870; ratifications exchanged at
London August 10, 1870; proclaimed September 16, 1870. _U.S. Treaties
and Conventions_ (1889), pp. 472-6.


~1871, Dec. 11. Congress (House): Bill on Slave-Trade.~

On the call of States, Mr. Banks introduced "a bill (House, No. 490) to
carry into effect article thirteen of the Constitution of the United
States, and to prohibit the owning or dealing in slaves by American
citizens in foreign countries." _House Journal_, 42 Cong. 2 sess. p.
48.

                    *       *       *       *       *




APPENDIX C.

TYPICAL CASES OF VESSELS ENGAGED IN THE AMERICAN SLAVE-TRADE. 1619-1864.

    This chronological list of certain typical American slavers is
    not intended to catalogue all known cases, but is designed
    merely to illustrate, by a few selected examples, the character
    of the licit and the illicit traffic to the United States.


~1619.~ ----. Dutch man-of-war, imports twenty Negroes into Virginia,
the first slaves brought to the continent. Smith, _Generall Historie of
Virginia_ (1626 and 1632), p. 126.


~1645.~ ~Rainbowe,~ under Captain Smith, captures and imports African
slaves into Massachusetts. The slaves were forfeited and returned.
_Massachusetts Colonial Records_, II. 115, 129, 136, 168, 176; III. 13,
46, 49, 58, 84.


~1655.~ ~Witte paert,~ first vessel to import slaves into New York.
O'Callaghan, _Laws of New Netherland_ (ed. 1868), p. 191, note.


~1736, Oct.~ ----. Rhode Island slaver, under Capt. John Griffen.
_American Historical Record_, I. 312.


~1746.~ ----. Spanish vessel, with certain free Negroes, captured by
Captains John Dennis and Robert Morris, and Negroes sold by them in
Rhode Island, Massachusetts, and New York; these Negroes afterward
returned to Spanish colonies by the authorities of Rhode Island. _Rhode
Island Colonial Records_, V. 170, 176-7; Dawson's _Historical Magazine_,
XVIII. 98.


~1752.~ ~Sanderson,~ of Newport, trading to Africa and West Indies.
_American Historical Record_, I. 315-9, 338-42. Cf. above, p. 35, note 4.


~1788~ (_circa_). ----. "One or two" vessels fitted out in Connecticut.
W.C. Fowler, _Historical Status of the Negro in Connecticut_, in _Local
Law_, etc., p. 125.


~1801.~ ~Sally,~ of Norfolk, Virginia, equipped slaver; libelled and
acquitted; owners claimed damages. _American State Papers, Commerce and
Navigation_, I. No. 128.


~1803~ (?). ----. Two slavers seized with slaves, and brought to
Philadelphia; both condemned, and slaves apprenticed. Robert Sutcliff,
_Travels in North America_, p. 219.


~1804.~ ----. Slaver, allowed by Governor Claiborne to land fifty
Negroes in Louisiana. _American State Papers, Miscellaneous_, I. No.
177.


~1814.~ ~Saucy Jack~ carries off slaves from Africa and attacks British
cruiser. _House Reports_, 17 Cong. 1 sess. II. No. 92, p. 46; 21 Cong. 1
sess. III. No. 348, p. 147.


~1816~ (_circa_). ~Paz,~ ~Rosa,~ ~Dolores,~ ~Nueva Paz,~ and ~Dorset,~
American slavers in Spanish-African trade. Many of these were formerly
privateers. _Ibid._, 17 Cong. 1 sess. II. No. 92, pp. 45-6; 21 Cong. 1
sess. III. No. 348, pp. 144-7.


~1817, Jan. 17.~ ~Eugene,~ armed Mexican schooner, captured while
attempting to smuggle slaves into the United States. _House Doc._, 15
Cong. 1 sess. II. No. 12, p. 22.


~1817, Nov. 19.~ ~Tentativa,~ captured with 128 slaves and brought into
Savannah. _Ibid._, p. 38; _House Reports_, 21 Cong. 1 sess. III. No.
348, p. 81. See _Friends' View of the African Slave Trade_ (1824), pp.
44-7.


~1818.~ ----. Three schooners unload slaves in Louisiana. Collector Chew
to the Secretary of the Treasury, _House Reports_, 21 Cong. 1 sess. III.
No. 348, p. 70.


~1818, Jan. 23.~ English brig ~Neptune,~ detained by U.S.S. John Adams,
for smuggling slaves into the United States. _House Doc._, 16 Cong. 1
sess. III. No. 36 (3).


~1818, June.~ ~Constitution,~ captured with 84 slaves on the Florida
coast, by a United States army officer. See references under 1818, June,
below.


~1818, June.~ ~Louisa~ and ~Merino,~ captured slavers, smuggling from
Cuba to the United States; condemned after five years' litigation.
_House Doc._, 15 Cong. 2 sess. VI. No. 107; 19 Cong. 1 sess. VI.-IX.
Nos. 121, 126, 152, 163; _House Reports_, 19 Cong. 1 sess. II. No. 231;
_American State Papers, Naval Affairs_, II. No. 308; Decisions of the
United States Supreme Court in _9 Wheaton_, 391.


~1819.~ ~Antelope,~ or ~General Ramirez.~ The Colombia (or Arraganta), a
Venezuelan privateer, fitted in the United States and manned by
Americans, captures slaves from a Spanish slaver, the Antelope, and from
other slavers; is wrecked, and transfers crew and slaves to Antelope;
the latter, under the name of the General Ramirez, is captured with 280
slaves by a United States ship. The slaves were distributed, some to
Spanish claimants, some sent to Africa, and some allowed to remain; many
died. _House Reports_, 17 Cong. 1 sess. II. No. 92, pp. 5, 15; 21 Cong.
1 sess. III. No. 348, p. 186; _House Journal_, 20 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 59,
76, 123 to 692, _passim_. Gales and Seaton, _Register of Debates_, IV.
pt. 1, pp. 915-6, 955-68, 998, 1005; _Ibid._, pt. 2, pp. 2501-3;
_American State Papers, Naval Affairs_, II. No. 319, pp. 750-60;
Decisions of the United States Supreme Court in _10 Wheaton_, 66, and
_12 Ibid._, 546.


~1820.~ ~Endymion,~ ~Plattsburg,~ ~Science,~ ~Esperanza,~ and
~Alexander,~ captured on the African coast by United States ships, and
sent to New York and Boston. _House Reports_, 17 Cong. 1 sess. II. No.
92, pp. 6, 15; 21 Cong. 1 sess. III. No. 348, pp. 122, 144, 187.


~1820.~ ~General Artigas~ imports twelve slaves into the United States.
_Friends' View of the African Slave Trade_ (1824), p. 42.

~1821~ (?). ~Dolphin,~ captured by United States officers and sent to
Charleston, South Carolina. _Ibid._, pp. 31-2.


~1821.~ ~La Jeune EugÃ¨ne,~ ~La DaphnÃ©e,~ ~La Mathilde,~ and ~L'Elize,~
captured by U.S.S. Alligator; ~La Jeune EugÃ¨ne~ sent to Boston; the rest
escape, and are recaptured under the French flag; the French protest.
_House Reports_, 21 Cong. 1 sess. III. No. 348, p. 187; _Friends' View
of the African Slave Trade_ (1824), pp. 35-41.


~1821.~ ~La PensÃ©e,~ captured with 220 slaves by the U.S.S. Hornet;
taken to Louisiana. _House Reports_, 17 Cong. 1 sess. II. No. 92, p. 5;
21 Cong. 1 sess. III. No. 348, p. 186.


~1821.~ ~Esencia~ lands 113 Negroes at Matanzas. _Parliamentary Papers_,
1822, Vol. XXII., _Slave Trade, Further Papers_, III. p. 78.


~1826.~ ~Fell's Point~ attempts to land Negroes in the United States.
The Negroes were seized. _American State Papers, Naval Affairs_, II. No.
319, p. 751.


~1827, Dec. 20.~ ~Guerrero,~ Spanish slaver, chased by British, cruiser
and grounded on Key West, with 561 slaves; a part (121) were landed at
Key West, where they were seized by the collector; 250 were seized by
the Spanish and taken to Cuba, etc. _House Journal_, 20 Cong. 1 sess. p.
650; _House_ _Reports_, 24 Cong. 1 sess. I. No. 268; 25 Cong. 2 sess.
I. No. 4; _American State Papers, Naval Affairs_, III. No. 370, p. 210;
_Niles's Register_, XXXIII. 373.


~1828, March 11.~ ~General Geddes~ brought into St. Augustine for safe
keeping 117 slaves, said to have been those taken from the wrecked
~Guerrero~ and landed at Key West (see above, 1827). _House Doc._, 20
Cong. 1 sess. VI. No. 262.


~1828.~ ~Blue-eyed Mary,~ of Baltimore, sold to Spaniards and captured
with 405 slaves by a British cruiser. _Niles's Register_, XXXIV. 346.


~1830, June 4.~ ~Fenix,~ with 82 Africans, captured by U.S.S. Grampus,
and brought to Pensacola; American built, with Spanish colors. _House
Doc._, 21 Cong. 2 sess. III. No. 54; _House Reports_, 24 Cong. 1 sess.
I. No. 223; _Niles's Register_, XXXVIII. 357.


~1831, Jan. 3.~ ~Comet,~ carrying slaves from the District of Columbia
to New Orleans, was wrecked on Bahama banks and 164 slaves taken to
Nassau, in New Providence, where they were freed. Great Britain finally
paid indemnity for these slaves. _Senate Doc._, 24 Cong. 2 sess. II. No.
174; 25 Cong. 3 sess. III. No. 216.


~1834, Feb. 4.~ ~Encomium,~ bound from Charleston, South Carolina, to
New Orleans, with 45 slaves, was wrecked near Fish Key, Abaco, and
slaves were carried to Nassau and freed. Great Britain eventually paid
indemnity for these slaves. _Ibid._


~1835, March.~ ~Enterprise,~ carrying 78 slaves from the District of
Columbia to Charleston, was compelled by rough weather to put into the
port of Hamilton, West Indies, where the slaves were freed. Great
Britain refused to pay for these, because, before they landed, slavery
in the West Indies had been abolished. _Ibid._


~1836, Aug.-Sept.~ ~Emanuel,~ ~Dolores,~ ~Anaconda,~ and ~Viper,~ built
in the United States, clear from Havana for Africa. _House Doc._, 26
Cong. 2 sess. V. No. 115, pp. 4-6, 221.


~1837.~ ----. Eleven American slavers clear from Havana for Africa.
_Ibid._, p. 221.


~1837.~ ~Washington,~ allowed to proceed to Africa by the American
consul at Havana. _Ibid._, pp. 488-90, 715 ff; 27 Cong, 1 sess. No. 34,
pp. 18-21.


~1838.~ ~Prova~ spends three months refitting in the harbor of
Charleston, South Carolina; afterwards captured by the British, with 225
slaves. _Ibid._, pp. 121, 163-6.


~1838.~ ----. Nineteen American slavers clear from Havana for Africa.
_House Doc._, 26 Cong. 2 sess. V. No. 115, p. 221.


~1838-9.~ ~Venus,~ American built, manned partly by Americans, owned by
Spaniards. _Ibid._, pp. 20-2, 106, 124-5, 132, 144-5, 330-2, 475-9.


~1839.~ ~Morris Cooper,~ of Philadelphia, lands 485 Negroes in Cuba.
_Niles's Register_, LVII. 192.


~1839.~ ~Edwin~ and ~George Crooks,~ slavers, boarded by British
cruisers. _House Doc._, 26 Cong. 2 sess. V. No. 115, pp. 12-4, 61-4.


~1839.~ ~Eagle,~ ~Clara,~ and ~Wyoming,~ with American and Spanish flags
and papers and an American crew, captured by British cruisers, and
brought to New York. The United States government declined to interfere
in case of the ~Eagle~ and the ~Clara,~ and they were taken to Jamaica.
The ~Wyoming~ was forfeited to the United States. _Ibid._, pp. 92-104,
109, 112, 118-9, 180-4; _Niles's Register_, LVI. 256; LVII. 128, 208.


~1839.~ ~Florida,~ protected from British cruisers by American papers.
_House Doc._, 26 Cong. 2 sess. V. No. 115, pp. 113-5.


~1839.~ ----. Five American slavers arrive at Havana from Africa, under
American flags. _Ibid._, p. 192.


~1839.~ ----. Twenty-three American slavers clear from Havana. _Ibid._,
pp. 190-1, 221.


~1839.~ ~Rebecca,~ part Spanish, condemned at Sierra Leone. _House
Reports_, 27 Cong. 3 sess. III. No. 283, pp. 649-54, 675-84.


~1839.~ ~Douglas~ and ~Iago,~ American slavers, visited by British
cruisers, for which the United States demanded indemnity. _Ibid._, pp.
542-65, 731-55; _Senate Doc._, 29 Cong. 1 sess. VIII. No. 377, pp.
39-45, 107-12, 116-24, 160-1, 181-2.


~1839, April 9.~ ~Susan,~ suspected slaver, boarded by the British.
_House Doc._, 26 Cong. 2 sess. V. No. 115, pp. 34-41.


~1839, July-Sept.~ ~Dolphin~ (or ~ConstituÃ§Ã£o),~ ~Hound,~ ~Mary Cushing~
(or ~Sete de Avril~), with American and Spanish flags and papers.
_Ibid._, pp. 28, 51-5, 109-10, 136, 234-8; _House Reports_, 27 Cong. 3
sess. III. No. 283, pp. 709-15.


~1839, Aug.~ ~L'Amistad,~ slaver, with fifty-three Negroes on board, who
mutinied; the vessel was then captured by a United States vessel and
brought into Connecticut; the Negroes were declared free. _House Doc._,
26 Cong. 1 sess. IV. No. 185; 27 Cong. 3 sess. V. No. 191; 28 Cong. 1
sess. IV. No. 83; _House Exec. Doc._, 32 Cong. 2 sess. III. No. 20;
_House Reports_, 26 Cong. 2 sess. No. 51; 28 Cong. 1 sess. II. No. 426;
29 Cong. 1 sess. IV. No. 753; _Senate Doc._, 26 Cong. 2 sess. IV. No.
179; _Senate Exec. Doc._, 31 Cong. 2 sess. III. No. 29; 32 Cong. 2 sess.
III. No. 19; _Senate Reports_, 31 Cong. 2 sess. No. 301; 32 Cong. 1
sess. I. No. 158; 35 Cong. 1 sess. I. No. 36; Decisions of the United
States Supreme Court in _15 Peters_, 518; _Opinions of the
Attorneys-General_, III. 484-92.


~1839, Sept.~ ~My Boy,~ of New Orleans, seized by a British cruiser, and
condemned at Sierra Leone. _Niles's Register_, LVII. 353.


~1839, Sept. 23.~ ~Butterfly,~ of New Orleans, fitted as a slaver, and
captured by a British cruiser on the coast of Africa. _House Doc._, 26
Cong. 2 sess. No. 115, pp. 191, 244-7; _Niles's Register_, LVII. 223.


~1839, Oct.~ ~Catharine,~ of Baltimore, captured on the African coast by
a British cruiser, and brought by her to New York. _House Doc._, 26
Cong. 2 sess. V No. 115, pp. 191, 215, 239-44; _Niles's Register_, LVII.
119, 159.


~1839.~ ~Asp,~ ~Laura,~ and ~Mary Ann Cassard,~ foreign slavers sailing
under the American flag. _House Doc._, 26 Cong. 2 sess. V. No. 115, pp.
126-7, 209-18; _House Reports_, 27 Cong. 3 sess. III. No. 283, p. 688
ff.


~1839.~ ~Two Friends,~ of New Orleans, equipped slaver, with Spanish,
Portuguese, and American flags. _House Doc._, 26 Cong. 2 sess. V. No.
115, pp. 120, 160-2, 305.


~1839.~ ~Euphrates,~ of Baltimore, with American papers, seized by
British cruisers as Spanish property. Before this she had been boarded
fifteen times. _Ibid._, pp. 41-4; A.H. Foote, _Africa and the American
Flag_, pp. 152-6.


~1839.~ ~Ontario,~ American slaver, "sold" to the Spanish on shipping a
cargo of slaves. _House Doc._, 26 Cong. 2 sess. V. No. 115, pp. 45-50.


~1839.~ ~Mary,~ of Philadelphia; case of a slaver whose nationality was
disputed. _House Reports_, 27 Cong. 3 sess. III. No. 283, pp. 736-8;
_Senate Doc._, 29 Cong. 1 sess. VIII. No. 377, pp. 19, 24-5.


~1840, March.~ ~Sarah Ann,~ of New Orleans, captured with fraudulent
papers. _House Doc._, 26 Cong. 2 sess. V. No. 115, pp. 184-7.


~1840, June.~ ~Caballero,~ ~Hudson,~ and ~Crawford;~ the arrival of
these American slavers was publicly billed in Cuba. _Ibid._, pp. 65-6.


~1840.~ ~Tigris,~ captured by British cruisers and sent to Boston for
kidnapping. _House Reports_, 27 Cong. 3 sess. III. No. 283, pp. 724-9;
_Senate Doc._, 29 Cong. 1 sess. VIII. No. 377, P. 94.


~1840.~ ~Jones,~ seized by the British. _Senate Doc._, 29 Cong. 1 sess.
VIII. No. 377, pp. 131-2, 143-7, 148-60.


~1841, Nov. 7.~ ~Creole,~ of Richmond, Virginia, transporting slaves to
New Orleans; the crew mutiny and take her to Nassau, British West
Indies. The slaves were freed and Great Britain refused indemnity.
_Senate Doc._, 27 Cong. 2 sess. II. No. 51 and III. No. 137.


~1841.~ ~Sophia,~ of New York, ships 750 slaves for Brazil. _House
Doc._, 29 Cong. 1 sess. III. No. 43, pp. 3-8.


~1841.~ ~Pilgrim,~ of Portsmouth, N.H., ~Solon,~ of Baltimore, ~William
Jones~ and ~Himmaleh,~ of New York, clear from Rio Janeiro for Africa.
_Ibid._, pp. 8-12.


~1842, May.~ ~Illinois,~ of Gloucester, saved from search by the
American flag; escaped under the Spanish flag, loaded with slaves.
_Senate Doc._, 28 Cong. 2 sess. IX. No. 150, p. 72 ff.


~1842, June.~ ~Shakespeare,~ of Baltimore, with 430 slaves, captured by
British cruisers. _Ibid._


~1843.~ ~Kentucky,~ of New York, trading to Brazil. _Ibid._, 30 Cong. 1
sess. IV. No. 28, pp. 71-8; _House Exec. Doc._, 30 Cong. 2 sess. VII.
No. 61, p. 72 ff.


~1844.~ ~Enterprise,~ of Boston, transferred in Brazil for slave-trade.
_Senate Exec. Doc._, 30 Cong. 1 sess. IV. No. 28, pp. 79-90.


~1844.~ ~Uncas,~ of New Orleans, protected by United States papers;
allowed to clear, in spite of her evident character. _Ibid._, 28 Cong. 2
sess. IX. No. 150, pp. 106-14.


~1844.~ ~Sooy,~ of Newport, without papers, captured by the British
sloop Racer, after landing 600 slaves on the coast of Brazil. _House
Doc._, 28 Cong. 2 sess. IV. No. 148, pp. 4, 36-62.


~1844.~ ~Cyrus,~ of New Orleans, suspected slaver, captured by the
British cruiser Alert. _Ibid._, pp. 3-41.


~1844-5.~ ----. Nineteen slavers from Beverly, Boston, Baltimore,
Philadelphia, New York, Providence, and Portland, make twenty-two trips.
_Ibid._, 30 Cong. 2 sess. VII. No. 61, pp. 219-20.


~1844-9.~ ----. Ninety-three slavers in Brazilian trade. _Senate Exec.
Doc._, 31 Cong. 2 sess. II. No. 6, pp. 37-8.


~1845.~ ~Porpoise,~ trading to Brazil. _House Exec. Doc._, 30 Cong. 2
sess. VII. No. 61, pp. 111-56, 212-4.


~1845, May 14.~ ~Spitfire,~ of New Orleans, captured on the coast of
Africa, and the captain indicted in Boston. A.H. Foote, _Africa and the
American Flag_, pp. 240-1; _Niles's Register_, LXVIII. 192, 224, 248-9.


~1845-6.~ ~Patuxent,~ ~Pons,~ ~Robert Wilson,~ ~Merchant,~ and
~Panther,~ captured by Commodore Skinner. _House Exec. Doc._, 31 Cong. 1
sess. IX. No. 73.


~1847.~ ~Fame,~ of New London, Connecticut, lands 700 slaves in Brazil.
_House Exec. Doc._, 30 Cong. 2 sess. VII. No. 61, pp. 5-6, 15-21.


~1847.~ ~Senator,~ of Boston, brings 944 slaves to Brazil. _Ibid._, pp.
5-14.


~1849.~ ~Casco,~ slaver, with no papers; searched, and captured with 420
slaves, by a British cruiser. _Senate Exec. Doc._, 31 Cong. 1 sess. XIV
No. 66, p. 13.


~1850.~ ~Martha,~ of New York, captured when about to embark 1800
slaves. The captain was admitted to bail, and escaped. A.H. Foote,
_Africa and the American Flag_, pp. 285-92.


~1850.~ ~Lucy Ann,~ of Boston, captured with 547 slaves by the British.
_Senate Exec. Doc._, 31 Cong. 1 sess. XIV No. 66, pp. 1-10 ff.


~1850.~ ~Navarre,~ American slaver, trading to Brazil, searched and
finally seized by a British cruiser. _Ibid._


~1850~ (_circa_). ~Louisa Beaton,~ ~Pilot,~ ~Chatsworth,~ ~Meteor,~ ~R.
de Zaldo,~ ~Chester,~ etc., American slavers, searched by British
vessels. _Ibid., passim._


~1851, Sept. 18.~ ~Illinois~ brings seven kidnapped West India Negro
boys into Norfolk, Virginia. _House Exec. Doc._, 34 Cong. 1 sess. XII.
No. 105, pp. 12-14.


~1852-62.~ ----. Twenty-six ships arrested and bonded for slave-trading
in the Southern District of New York. _Senate Exec. Doc._, 37 Cong. 2
sess. V. No. 53.


~1852.~ ~Advance~ and ~Rachel P. Brown,~ of New York; the capture of
these was hindered by the United States consul in the Cape Verd Islands.
_Ibid._, 34 Cong. 1 sess. XV. No. 99, pp. 41-5; _House Exec. Doc._, 34
Cong. 1 sess. XII. No. 105, pp. 15-19.


~1853.~ ~Silenus,~ of New York, and ~General de Kalb,~ of Baltimore,
carry 900 slaves from Africa. _Senate Exec. Doc._, 34 Cong. 1 sess. XV.
No. 99, pp. 46-52; _House Exec. Doc._, 34 Cong. 1 sess. XII. No. 105,
pp. 20-26.


~1853.~ ~Jasper~ carries slaves to Cuba. _Senate Exec. Doc._, 34 Cong. 1
sess. XV. No. 99, pp. 52-7.


~1853.~ ~Camargo,~ of Portland, Maine, lands 500 slaves in Brazil.
_Ibid._, 33 Cong. 1 sess. VIII. No. 47.


~1854.~ ~Glamorgan,~ of New York, captured when about to embark nearly
700 slaves. _Ibid._, 34 Cong. 1 sess. XV. No. 99, pp. 59-60.


~1854.~ ~Grey Eagle,~ of Philadelphia, captured off Cuba by British
cruiser. _Ibid._, pp. 61-3.


~1854.~ ~Peerless,~ of New York, lands 350 Negroes in Cuba. _Ibid._,
p. 66.


~1854.~ ~Oregon,~ of New Orleans, trading to Cuba. _Senate Exec. Doc._,
34 Cong. 1 sess. XV. No. 99, pp. 69-70.


~1856.~ ~Mary E. Smith,~ sailed from Boston in spite of efforts to
detain her, and was captured with 387 slaves, by the Brazilian brig
Olinda, at port of St. Matthews. _Ibid._, pp. 71-3.


~1857.~ ----. Twenty or more slavers from New York, New Orleans, etc.
_Ibid._, 35 Cong. 1 sess. XII. No. 49, pp. 14-21, 70-1, etc.


~1857.~ ~William Clark~ and ~Jupiter,~ of New Orleans, ~Eliza Jane,~ of
New York, ~Jos. H. Record,~ of Newport, and ~Onward,~ of Boston,
captured by British cruisers. _Ibid._, pp. 13, 25-6, 69, etc.


~1857.~ ~James Buchanan,~ slaver, escapes under American colors, with
300 slaves. _Ibid._, p. 38.


~1857.~ ~James Titers,~ of New Orleans, with 1200 slaves, captured by
British cruiser. _Ibid._, pp. 31-4, 40-1.


~1857.~ ----. Four New Orleans slavers on the African coast. _Senate
Exec. Doc._, 35 Cong. 1 sess., XII. No. 49, p. 30.


~1857.~ ~Cortes,~ of New York, captured. _Ibid._, pp. 27-8.


~1857.~ ~Charles,~ of Boston, captured by British cruisers, with about
400 slaves. _Ibid._, pp. 9, 13, 36, 69, etc.


~1857.~ ~Adams Gray~ and ~W.D. Miller,~ of New Orleans, fully equipped
slavers. _Ibid._, pp. 3-5, 13.


~1857-8.~ ~Charlotte,~ of New York, ~Charles,~ of Maryland, etc.,
reported American slavers. _Ibid., passim_.


~1858, Aug. 21.~ ~Echo,~ captured with 306 slaves, and brought to
Charleston, South Carolina. _House Exec. Doc._, 35 Cong. 2 sess. II. pt.
4, No. 2. pt. 4, pp. 5, 14.


~1858, Sept. 8.~ ~Brothers,~ captured and sent to Charleston, South
Carolina. _Ibid._, p. 14.


~1858.~ ~Mobile,~ ~Cortez,~ ~Tropic Bird;~ cases of American slavers
searched by British vessels. _Ibid._, 36 Cong. 2 sess. IV. No. 7, p. 97
ff.


~1858.~ ~Wanderer,~ lands 500 slaves in Georgia. _Senate Exec. Doc._, 35
Cong. 2 sess. VII. No. 8; _House Exec. Doc._, 35 Cong. 2 sess. IX. No.
89.


~1859, Dec. 20.~ ~Delicia,~ supposed to be Spanish, but without papers;
captured by a United States ship. The United States courts declared her
beyond their jurisdiction. _House Exec. Doc._, 36 Cong. 2 sess. IV. No.
7, p. 434.


~1860.~ ~Erie,~ with 897 Africans, captured by a United States ship.
_Senate Exec. Doc._, 36 Cong. 2 sess. I. No. 1, pp. 41-4.


~1860.~ ~William,~ with 550 slaves, ~Wildfire,~ with 507, captured on
the coast of Cuba. _Senate Journal_, 36 Cong. 1 sess. pp. 478-80, 492,
543, etc.; _Senate Exec. Doc._, 36 Cong. 1 sess. XI. No. 44; _House
Exec. Doc._, 36 Cong. 1 sess. XII. No. 83; 36 Cong. 2 sess. V. No. 11;
_House Reports_, 36 Cong. 1 sess. IV. No. 602.


~1861.~ ~Augusta,~ slaver, which, in spite of the efforts of the
officials, started on her voyage. _Senate Exec Doc._, 37 Cong. 2 sess.
V. No. 40; _New York Tribune_, Nov. 26, 1861.


~1861.~ ~Storm King,~ of Baltimore, lands 650 slaves in Cuba. _Senate
Exec. Doc._, 38 Cong. 1 sess. No. 56, p. 3.


~1862.~ ~Ocilla,~ of Mystic, Connecticut, lands slaves in Cuba. _Ibid._,
pp. 8-13.


~1864.~ ~Huntress,~ of New York, under the American flag, lands slaves
in Cuba. _Ibid._, pp. 19-21.

                    *       *       *       *       *




APPENDIX D.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.

~COLONIAL LAWS.~

[The Library of Harvard College, the Boston Public Library, and the
Charlemagne Tower Collection at Philadelphia are especially rich in
Colonial Laws.]


~Alabama and Mississippi Territory.~ Acts of the Assembly of Alabama,
1822, etc.; J.J. Ormond, Code of Alabama, Montgomery, 1852; H. Toulmin,
Digest of the Laws of Alabama, Cahawba, 1823; A. Hutchinson, Code of
Mississippi, Jackson, 1848; Statutes of Mississippi etc., digested,
Natchez, 1816 and 1823.

~Connecticut.~ Acts and Laws of Connecticut, New London, 1784 [-1794],
and Hartford, 1796; Connecticut Colonial Records; The General Laws and
Liberties of Connecticut Colonie, Cambridge, 1673, reprinted at Hartford
in 1865; Statute Laws of Connecticut, Hartford, 1821.

~Delaware.~ Laws of Delaware, 1700-1797, 2 vols., New Castle, 1797.

~Georgia.~ George W.J. De Renne, editor, Colonial Acts of Georgia,
Wormsloe, 1881; Constitution of Georgia; T.R.R. Cobb, Digest of the
Laws, Athens, Ga., 1851; Horatio Marbury and W.H. Crawford, Digest of
the Laws, Savannah, 1802; Oliver H. Prince, Digest of the Laws, 2d
edition, Athens, Ga., 1837.

~Maryland.~ James Bisset, Abridgment of the Acts of Assembly,
Philadelphia, 1759; Acts of Maryland, 1753-1768, Annapolis, 1754
[-1768]; Compleat Collection of the Laws of Maryland, Annapolis, 1727;
Thomas Bacon, Laws of Maryland at Large, Annapolis, 1765; Laws of
Maryland since 1763, Annapolis, 1787, year 1771; Clement Dorsey, General
Public Statutory Law, etc., 1692-1837, 3 vols., Baltimore, 1840.

~Massachusetts.~ Acts and Laws of His Majesty's Province of the
Massachusetts-Bay in New-England, Boston, 1726; Acts and Resolves ... of
the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, 1692-1780 [Massachusetts
Province Laws]; Colonial Laws of Massachusetts, reprinted from the
editions of 1660 and 1672, Boston, 1887, 1890; General Court Records;
Massachusetts Archives; Massachusetts Historical Society Collections;
Perpetual Laws of Massachusetts, 1780-1789, Boston, 1789; Plymouth
Colony Records; Records of the Governor and Company of the Massachusetts
Bay.

~New Jersey.~ Samuel Allinson, Acts of Assembly, Burlington, 1776;
William Paterson, Digest of the Laws, Newark, 1800; William A.
Whitehead, editor, Documents relating to the Colonial History of New
Jersey, Newark, 1880-93; Joseph Bloomfield, Laws of New Jersey, Trenton,
1811; New Jersey Archives.

~New York.~ Acts of Assembly, 1691-1718, London, 1719; E.B. O'Callaghan,
Documentary History of New York, 4 vols., Albany, 1849-51; E.B.
O'Callaghan, editor, Documents relating to the Colonial History of New
York, 12 vols., Albany, 1856-77; Laws of New York, 1752-1762, New York,
1762; Laws of New York, 1777-1801, 5 vols., republished at Albany,
1886-7.

~North Carolina.~ F.X. Martin, Iredell's Public Acts of Assembly,
Newbern, 1804; Laws, revision of 1819, 2 vols., Raleigh, 1821; North
Carolina Colonial Records, edited by William L. Saunders, Raleigh,
1886-90.

~Pennsylvania.~ Acts of Assembly, Philadelphia, 1782; Charter and Laws
of the Province of Pennsylvania, Harrisburg, 1879; M. Carey and J.
Bioren, Laws of Pennsylvania, 1700-1802, 6 vols., Philadelphia, 1803;
A.J. Dallas, Laws of Pennsylvania, 1700-1781, Philadelphia, 1797;
_Ibid._, 1781-1790, Philadelphia, 1793; Collection of all the Laws now
in force, 1742; Pennsylvania Archives; Pennsylvania Colonial Records.

~Rhode Island.~ John Russell Bartlett, Index to the Printed Acts and
Resolves, of ... the General Assembly, 1756-1850, Providence, 1856;
Elisha R. Potter, Reports and Documents upon Public Schools, etc.,
Providence, 1855; Rhode Island Colonial Records.

~South Carolina.~ J.F. GrimkÃ©, Public Laws, Philadelphia, 1790; Thomas
Cooper and D.J. McCord, Statutes at Large, 10 vols., Columbia, 1836-41.

~Vermont.~ Statutes of Vermont, Windsor, 1787; Vermont State Papers,
Middlebury, 1823.

~Virginia.~ John Mercer, Abridgement of the Acts of Assembly, Glasgow,
1759; Acts of Assembly, Williamsburg, 1769: Collection of Public Acts
... passed since 1768, Richmond, 1785; Collections of the Virginia
Historical Society; W.W. Hening, Statutes at Large, 13 vols., Richmond,
etc., 1819-23; Samuel Shepherd, Statutes at Large, New Series
(continuation of Hening), 3 vols, Richmond, 1835-6.


~UNITED STATES DOCUMENTS.~

~1789-1836.~ American State Papers--Class I., _Foreign Relations_, Vols.
III. and IV. (Reprint of Foreign Relations, 1789-1828.) Class VI.,
_Naval Affairs_. (Well indexed.)

~1794, Feb. 11.~ Report of Committee on the Slave Trade. _Amer. State
Papers, Miscellaneous_, I. No. 44.

~1806, Feb. 17.~ Report of the Committee appointed on the seventh
instant, to inquire whether any, and if any, what Additional Provisions
are necessary to Prevent the Importation of Slaves into the Territories
of the United States. _House Reports_, 9 Cong. 1 sess. II.

~1817, Feb. 11.~ Joint Resolution for abolishing the traffick in Slaves,
and the Colinization [_sic_] of the Free People Of Colour of the United
States. _House Doc._, 14 Cong. 2 sess. II. No. 77.

~1817, Dec. 15.~ Message from the President ... communicating
Information of the Proceeding of certain Persons who took Possession of
Amelia Island and of Galvezton, [_sic_] during the Summer of the Present
Year, and made Establishments there. _House Doc._, 15 Cong. 1 sess. II.
No. 12. (Contains much evidence of illicit traffic.)

~1818, Jan. 10.~ Report of the Committee to whom was referred so much of
the President's Message as relates to the introduction of Slaves from
Amelia Island. _House Doc._, 15 Cong. 1 sess. III. No. 46 (cf. _House
Reports_, 21 Cong. 1 sess. III. No. 348).

~1818, Jan. 13.~ Message from the President ... communicating
information of the Troops of the United States having taken possession
of Amelia Island, in East Florida. _House Doc._, 15 Cong. 1 sess. III.
No. 47. (Contains correspondence.)

~1819, Jan. 12.~ Letter from the Secretary of the Navy, transmitting
copies of the instructions which have been issued to Naval Commanders,
upon the subject of the Importation of Slaves, etc. _House Doc._, 15
Cong. 2 sess. IV. No. 84.

~1819, Jan. 19.~ Extracts from Documents in the Departments of State, of
the Treasury, and of the Navy, in relation to the Illicit Introduction
of Slaves into the United States. _House Doc._, 15 Cong. 2 sess. VI. No.
100.

~1819, Jan. 21.~ Letter from the Secretary of the Treasury ... in
relation to Ships engaged in the Slave Trade, which have been Seized and
Condemned, and the Disposition which has been made of the Negroes, by
the several State Governments, under whose Jurisdiction they have
fallen. _House Doc._, 15 Cong. 2 sess. VI. No. 107.

~1820, Jan. 7.~ Letter from the Secretary of the Navy, transmitting
information in relation to the Introduction of Slaves into the United
States. _House Doc._, 16 Cong. 1 sess. III. No. 36.

~1820, Jan. 13.~ Letter from the Secretary of the Treasury, transmitting
... Information in relation to the Illicit Introduction of Slaves into
the United States, etc., _Ibid._, No. 42.

~1820, May 8.~ Report of the Committee to whom was referred ... so much
of the President's Message as relates to the Slave Trade, etc. _House
Reports_, 16 Cong. 1 sess. No. 97.

~1821, Jan. 5.~ Message from the President ... transmitting ...
Information on the Subject of the African Slave Trade. _House Doc._, 16
Cong. 2 sess. IV. No. 48.

~1821, Feb. 7.~ Report of the Secretary of the Navy. _House Reports_, 17
Cong. 1 sess. No. 92, pp. 15-21.

~1821, Feb. 9.~ Report of the Committee to which was referred so much of
the President's message as relates to the Slave Trade. _House Reports_,
16 Cong. 2 sess. No. 59.

~1822, April 12.~ Report of the Committee on the Suppression of the
Slave Trade. Also Report of 1821, Feb. 9, reprinted. (Contains
discussion of the Right of Search, and papers on European Conference for
the Suppression of the Slave Trade.) _House Reports_, 17 Cong. 1 sess.
II. No. 92.

~1823, Dec. 1.~ Report of the Secretary of the Navy. _House Doc._, 18
Cong. 1 sess. I. No. 2, p. 111, ff.; _Amer. State Papers, Naval
Affairs_, I. No. 258. (Contains reports on the establishment at Cape
Mesurado.)[1]

~1824, March 20.~ Message from the President ... in relation to the
Suppression of the African Slave Trade. _House Doc._, 18 Cong. 1 sess.
VI. No. 119. (Contains correspondence on the proposed treaty of 1824.)

~1824, Dec. 1.~ Report of the Secretary of the Navy. _Amer. State
Papers, Naval Affairs_, I. No. 249.

~1824, Dec. 7.~ Documents accompanying the Message of the President ...
to both Houses of Congress, at the commencement of the Second Session of
the Eighteenth Congress: Documents from the Department of State. _House
Doc._, 18 Cong. 2 sess. I. No. 1. pp. 1-56. Reprinted in _Senate Doc._,
18 Cong. 2 sess. I. No. 1. (Matter on the treaty of 1824.)

~1825, Feb. 16.~ Report of the Committee to whom was referred so much of
the President's Message, of the 7th of December last, as relates to the
Suppression of the Slave Trade. _House Reports_, 18 Cong. 2 sess. I. No.
70 (Report favoring the treaty of 1824.)

~1825, Dec. 2.~ Report of the Secretary of the Navy. _House Doc._, 19
Cong. 1 sess. I. No. 1. p. 98.

~1825, Dec. 27.~ Slave Trade: Message from the President ...
communicating Correspondence with Great Britain in relation to the
Convention for Suppressing the Slave Trade. _House Doc._, 19 Cong. 1
sess. I. No. 16.

~1826, Feb. 6.~ Appropriation--Slave Trade: Report of the Committee of
Ways and Means on the subject of the estimate of appropriations for the
service of the year 1826. _House Reports_, 19 Cong. 1 sess. I. No. 65.
(Contains report of the Secretary of the Navy and account of
expenditures for the African station.)

~1826, March 8.~ Slave Ships in Alabama: Message from the President ...
in relation to the Cargoes of certain Slave Ships, etc. _House Doc._, 19
Cong. 1 sess. VI. No. 121; cf. _Ibid._, VIII. No. 126, and IX. Nos. 152,
163; also _House Reports_, 19 Cong. 1 sess. II. No. 231. (Cases of the
Constitution, Louisa, and Merino.)

~1826, Dec. 2.~ Report of the Secretary of the Navy. (Part IV. of
Documents accompanying the President's Message.) _House Doc._, 19 Cong.
2 sess. I. No. 2, pp. 9, 10, 74-103.

~1827, etc.~ Colonization Society: Reports, etc. _House Doc._, 19 Cong.
2 sess. IV. Nos. 64, 69; 20 Cong. 1 sess. III. Nos. 99, 126, and V. No.
193; 20 Cong. 2 sess. I. No. 2, pp. 114, 127-8; 21 Cong. 2 sess. I. No.
2, p. 211-18; _House Reports_, 19 Cong. 2 sess. II. No. 101; 21 Cong. 1
sess. II. No. 277, and III. No. 348; 22 Cong. 1 sess. II. No. 277.

~1827, Jan. 30.~ Prohibition of the Slave Trade: Statement showing the
Expenditure of the Appropriation for the Prohibition of the Slave Trade,
during the year 1826, and an Estimate for 1827. _House Doc._, 19 Cong. 2
sess. IV. No. 69.

~1827, Dec. 1 and Dec. 4.~ Reports of the Secretary of the Navy. _Amer.
State Papers, Naval Affairs,_ III. Nos. 339, 340.

~1827, Dec. 6.~ Message from the President ... transmitting ... a Report
from the Secretary of the Navy, showing the expense annually incurred in
carrying into effect the Act of March 2, 1819, for Prohibiting the Slave
Trade. _Senate Doc._, 20 Cong. 1 sess. I. No. 3.

~1828, March 12.~ Recaptured Africans: Letter from the Secretary of the
Navy ... in relation to ... Recaptured Africans. _House Doc._, 20 Cong.
1 sess. V. No. 193; cf. _Ibid._, 20 Cong. 2 sess. I. No. 2, pp. 114,
127-8; also _Amer. State Papers, Naval Affairs_, III. No. 357.

~1828, April 30.~ Africans at Key West: Message from the President ...
relative to the Disposition of the Africans Landed at Key West. _House
Doc._, 20 Cong. 1 sess. VI. No. 262.

~1828, Nov. 27.~ Report of the Secretary of the Navy. _Amer. State
Papers, Naval Affairs_, III. No. 370.

~1829, Dec. 1.~ Report of the Secretary of the Navy. _House Doc._, 21
Cong. 1 sess. I. No. 2, p. 40.

~1830, April 7.~ Slave Trade ... Report: "The committee to whom were
referred the memorial of the American Society for colonizing the free
people of color of the United States; also, sundry memorials from the
inhabitants of the State of Kentucky, and a memorial from certain free
people of color of the State of Ohio, report," etc., 3 pp. Appendix.
Collected and arranged by Samuel Burch. 290 pp. _House Reports_, 21
Cong. 1 sess. III. No. 348. (Contains a reprint of legislation and
documents from 14 Cong. 2 sess. to 21 Cong. 1 sess. Very valuable.)

~1830, Dec. 6.~ Report of the Secretary of the Navy. _House Doc._, 21
Cong. 2 sess. I. No. 2, pp. 42-3; _Amer. State Papers, Naval Affairs_,
III. No. 429 E.

~1830, Dec. 6.~ Documents communicated to Congress by the President at
the opening of the Second Session of the Twenty-first Congress,
accompanying the Report of the Secretary of the Navy: Paper E. Statement
of expenditures, etc., for the removal of Africans to Liberia. _House
Doc._, 21 Cong. 2 sess. I. No. 2, pp. 211-8.

~1831, Jan. 18.~ Spanish Slave Ship Fenix: Message from the President
... transmitting Documents in relation to certain captives on board the
Spanish slave vessel, called the Fenix. _House Doc._, 21 Cong. 2 sess.
III. No. 54; _Amer. State Papers, Naval Affairs_, III. No. 435.

~1831-1835.~ Reports of the Secretary of the Navy. _House Doc._, 22
Cong. 1 sess. I. No. 2, pp. 45, 272-4; 22 Cong. 2 sess. I. No. 2, pp.
48, 229; 23 Cong. 1 sess. I. No. 1, pp. 238, 269; 23 Cong. 2 sess. I.
No. 2, pp. 315, 363; 24 Cong. 1 sess. I. No. 2, pp. 336, 378. Also
_Amer. State Papers, Naval Affairs_, IV. No. 457, R. Nos. 1, 2; No. 486,
H. I.; No. 519, R.; No. 564, P.; No. 585, P.

~1836, Jan. 26.~ Calvin Mickle, Ex'r of Nagle & De Frias. _House
Reports_, 24 Cong. 1 sess. I. No. 209. (Reports on claims connected with
the captured slaver Constitution.)

~1836, Jan. 27, etc.~ [Reports from the Committee of Claims on cases of
captured Africans.] _House Reports_, 24 Cong. 1 sess. I. Nos. 223, 268,
and III. No. 574. No. 268 is reprinted in _House Reports_, 25 Cong. 2
sess. I. No. 4.

~1836, Dec. 3.~ Report of the Secretary of the Navy. _House Doc._, 24
Cong. 2 sess. I. No. 2, pp. 450, 506.

~1837, Feb. 14.~ Message from the President ... with copies of
Correspondence in relation to the Seizure of Slaves on board the brigs
"Encomium" and "Enterprise." _Senate Doc._, 24 Cong. 2 sess. II. No.
174; cf. _Ibid._, 25 Cong. 3 sess. III. No. 216.

~1837-1839.~ Reports of the Secretary of the Navy. _House Doc._, 25
Cong. 2 sess. I. No. 3, pp. 762, 771, 850; 25 Cong. 3 sess. I. No. 2, p.
613; 26 Cong. 1 sess. I. No. 2, pp. 534, 612.

~1839.~ [L'Amistad Case.] _House Doc._, 26 Cong. 1 sess. IV. No. 185
(correspondence); 27 Cong. 3 sess. V. No. 191 (correspondence); 28 Cong.
1 sess. IV No. 83; _House Exec. Doc._, 32 Cong. 2 sess. III. No. 20;
_House Reports_, 26 Cong. 2 sess. No. 51 (case of altered Ms.); 28 Cong.
1 sess. II. No. 426 (Report of Committee); 29 Cong. 1 sess. IV. No. 753
(Report of Committee); _Senate Doc._, 26 Cong. 2 sess. IV. No. 179
(correspondence); _Senate Exec Doc._, 31 Cong. 2 sess. III. No. 29
(correspondence); 32 Cong. 2 sess. III. No. 19; _Senate Reports_, 31
Cong. 2 sess. No. 301 (Report of Committee); 32 Cong. 1 sess. I. No. 158
(Report of Committee); 35 Cong. 1 sess. I. No. 36 (Report of Committee).

~1840, May 18.~ Memorial of the Society of Friends, upon the subject of
the foreign slave trade. _House Doc._, 26 Cong. 1 sess. VI. No. 211.
(Results of certain investigations.)

~1840, Dec. 5.~ Report of the Secretary of the Navy. _House Doc._, 26
Cong. 2 sess. I. No. 2, pp. 405, 450.

~1841, Jan. 20.~ Message from the President ... communicating ... copies
of correspondence, imputing malpractices to the American consul at
Havana, in regard to granting papers to vessels engaged in the
slave-trade. _Senate Doc._, 26 Cong. 2 sess. III. No. 125. (Contains
much information.)

~1841, March 3.~ Search or Seizure of American Vessels, etc.: Message
from the President ... transmitting a report from the Secretary of
State, in relation to seizures or search of American vessels on the
coast of Africa, etc. _House Doc._, 26 Cong. 2 sess. V. No. 115
(elaborate correspondence). See also _Ibid._, 27 Cong. 1 sess. No. 34;
_House Reports_, 27 Cong. 3 sess. III. No. 283, pp. 478-755
(correspondence).

~1841, Dec. 4.~ Report of the Secretary of the Navy. _House Doc._, 27
Cong. 2 sess. I. No. 2, pp. 349, 351.

~1842, Jan. 20.~ Message from the President ... communicating ... copies
of correspondence in relation to the mutiny on board the brig Creole,
and the liberation of the slaves who were passengers in the said vessel.
_Senate Doc._, 27 Cong. 2 sess. II. No. 51. See also _Ibid._, III. No.
137; _House Doc._, 27 Cong. 3 sess. I. No. 2, p. 114.

~1842, May 10.~ Resolutions of the Legislature of the State of
Mississippi in reference to the right of search, and the case of the
American brig Creole. _House Doc._, 27 Cong. 2 sess. IV. No. 215.
(Suggestive.)

~1842, etc.~ [Quintuple Treaty and Cass's Protest: Messages of the
President, etc.] _House Doc._, 27 Cong. 2 sess. V. No. 249; _Senate
Doc._, 27 Cong. 3 sess. II. No. 52, and IV. No. 223; 29 Cong. 1 sess.
VIII. No. 377.

~1842, June 10.~ Indemnities for slaves on board the Comet and Encomium:
Report of the Secretary of State. _House Doc._, 27 Cong. 2 sess. V. No.
242.

~1842, Aug.~ Suppression of the African Slave Trade--Extradition: Case
of the Creole, etc. _House Doc._, 27 Cong. 3 sess. I. No. 2, pp.
105-136. (Correspondence accompanying Message of President.)

~1842, Dec.~ Report of the Secretary of the Navy. _House Doc._, 27 Cong.
3 sess. I. No. 2, p. 532.

~1842, Dec. 30.~ Message from the President ... in relation to the
strength and expense of the squadron to be employed on the coast of
Africa. _Senate Doc._, 27 Cong. 3 sess. II. No. 20.

~1843, Feb. 28.~ Construction of the Treaty of Washington, etc.: Message
from the President ... transmitting a report from the Secretary of
State, in answer to the resolution of the House of the 22d February,
1843. _House Doc._, 27 Cong. 3 sess. V. No. 192.

~1843, Feb. 28.~ African Colonization.... Report: "The Committee on
Commerce, to whom was referred the memorial of the friends of African
colonization, assembled in convention in the city of Washington in May
last, beg leave to submit the following report," etc. (16 pp.).
Appendix. (1071 pp.). _House Reports_, 27 Cong. 3 sess. III. No. 283
[Contents of Appendix: pp. 17-408, identical nearly with the Appendix to
_House Reports_, 21 Cong. 1 sess. III. No. 348; pp. 408-478.
Congressional history of the slave-trade, case of the Fenix, etc. (cf.
_House Doc._, 21 Cong. 2 sess. III. No. 54); pp. 478-729, search and
seizure of American vessels (same as _House Doc._, 26 Cong. 2 sess. V.
No. 115, pp. 1-252); pp. 730-755, correspondence on British search of
American vessels, etc.; pp. 756-61, Quintuple Treaty; pp. 762-3,
President's Message on Treaty of 1842; pp. 764-96, correspondence on
African squadron, etc.; pp. 796-1088, newspaper extracts on the
slave-trade and on colonization, report of Colonization Society, etc.]

~1843, Nov. 25.~ Report of the Secretary of the Navy. _House Doc._, 28
Cong. 1 sess. I. No. 2, pp. 484-5.

~1844, March 14.~ Message from the President ... communicating ...
information in relation to the abuse of the flag of the United States in
... the African slave trade, etc. _Senate Doc._, 28 Cong. 1 sess. IV.
No. 217.

~1844, March 15.~ Report: "The Committee on the Judiciary, to whom was
referred the petition of ... John Hanes, ... praying an adjustment of
his accounts for the maintenance of certain captured African slaves, ask
leave to report," etc. _Senate Doc._, 28 Cong. 1 sess. IV. No. 194.

~1844, May 4.~ African Slave Trade: Report: "The Committee on Foreign
Affairs, to whom was referred the petition of the American Colonization
Society and others, respectfully report," etc. _House Reports_, 28 Cong.
1 sess. II. No. 469.

~1844, May 22.~ Suppression of the Slave-Trade on the coast of Africa:
Message from the President, etc. _House Doc._, 28 Cong. 1 sess. VI. No.
263.

~1844, Nov. 25.~ Report of the Secretary of the Navy. _House Doc._, 28
Cong. 2 sess. I. No. 2, p. 514.

~1845, Feb. 20.~ Slave-Trade, etc.: Message from the President ...
transmitting copies of despatches from the American minister at the
court of Brazil, relative to the slave-trade, etc. _House Doc._, 28
Cong. 2 sess. IV. No. 148. (Important evidence, statistics, etc.)

~1845, Feb. 26.~ Message from the President ... communicating ...
information relative to the operations of the United States squadron,
etc. _Senate Doc._, 28 Cong. 2 sess. IX. No. 150. (Contains reports of
Commodore Perry, and statistics of Liberia.)

~1845, Dec. 1.~ Report of the Secretary of the Navy. _House Doc._, 29
Cong. 1 sess. I. No. 2, p. 645.

~1845, Dec. 22.~ African Slave-Trade: Message from the President ...
transmitting a report from the Secretary of State, together with the
correspondence of George W. Slacum, relative to the African slave trade.
_House Doc._, 29 Cong. 1 sess. III. No. 43. (Contains much information.)

~1846, June 6.~ Message from the President ... communicating ... copies
of the correspondence between the government of the United States and
that of Great Britain, on the subject of the right of search; with
copies of the protest of the American minister at Paris against the
quintuple treaty, etc. _Senate Doc._, 29 Cong. 1 sess. VIII. No. 377.
Cf. _Ibid._, 27 Cong. 3 sess. II. No. 52, and IV. No. 223; _House Doc._,
27 Cong. 2 sess. V. No. 249.

~1846-1847, Dec.~ Reports of the Secretary of the Navy. _House Doc._, 29
Cong. 2 sess. I. No. 4, p. 377; 30 Cong. 1 sess. II. No. 8, p. 946.

~1848, March 3.~ Message from the President ... communicating a report
from the Secretary of State, with the correspondence of Mr. Wise, late
United States minister to Brazil, in relation to the slave trade.
_Senate Exec. Doc._, 30 Cong. 1 sess. IV. No. 28. (Full of facts.)

~1848, May 12.~ Report of the Secretary of State, in relation to ...
the seizure of the brig Douglass by a British cruiser. _Senate Exec.
Doc._, 30 Cong. 1 sess. VI. No. 44.

~1848, Dec. 4.~ Report of the Secretary of the Navy. _House Exec. Doc._,
30 Cong. 2 sess. I. No. 1, pp. 605, 607.

~1849, March 2.~ Correspondence between the Consuls of the United States
at Rio de Janeiro, etc., with the Secretary of State, on the subject of
the African Slave Trade: Message of the President, etc. _House Exec.
Doc._, 30 Cong. 2 sess. VII. No. 61. (Contains much evidence.)

~1849, Dec. 1.~ Report of the Secretary of the Navy. _House Exec. Doc._,
31 Cong. 1 sess. III. pt. 1, No. 5, pt. 1, pp. 427-8.

~1850, March 18.~ Report of the Secretary of the Navy, showing the
annual number of deaths in the United States squadron on the coast of
Africa, and the annual cost of that squadron. _Senate Exec. Doc._, 31
Cong. 1 sess. X. No. 40.

~1850, July 22.~ African Squadron: Message from the President ...
transmitting Information in reference to the African squadron. _House
Exec. Doc._, 31 Cong. 1 sess. IX. No. 73. (Gives total expenses of the
squadron, slavers captured, etc.)

~1850, Aug. 2.~ Message from the President ... relative to the searching
of American vessels by British ships of war. _Senate Exec. Doc._, 31
Cong. 1 sess. XIV. No. 66.

~1850, Dec. 17.~ Message of the President ... communicating ... a report
of the Secretary of State, with documents relating to the African slave
trade. _Senate Exec. Doc._, 31 Cong. 2 sess. II. No. 6.

~1851-1853.~ Reports of the Secretary of the Navy. _House Exec. Doc._,
32 Cong. 1 sess. II. pt. 2, No. 2, pt. 2, pp. 4-5; 32 Cong. 2 sess. I.
pt. 2, No. 1, pt. 2, p. 293; 33 Cong. 1 sess. I. pt. 3, No. 1, pt. 3,
pp. 298-9.

~1854, March 13.~ Message from the President ... communicating ... the
correspondence between Mr. Schenck, United States Minister to Brazil,
and the Secretary of State, in relation to the African slave trade.
_Senate Exec. Doc._, 33 Cong. 1 sess. VIII. No. 47.

~1854, June 13.~ Report submitted by Mr. Slidell, from the Committee on
Foreign Relations, on a resolution relative to the abrogation of the
eighth article of the treaty with Great Britain of the 9th of August,
1842, etc. _Senate Reports_, 34 Cong. 1 sess. I. No. 195. (Injunction of
secrecy removed June 26, 1856.)

~1854-1855, Dec.~ Reports of the Secretary of the Navy. _House Exec.
Doc._, 33 Cong. 2 sess. I. pt. 2, No. 1, pt. 2, pp. 386-7; 34 Cong. 1
sess. I. pt. 3, No. 1, pt. 3, p. 5.

~1856, May 19.~ Slave and Coolie Trade: Message from the President ...
communicating information in regard to the Slave and Coolie trade.
_House Exec. Doc._, 34 Cong. 1 sess. XII. No. 105. (Partly reprinted in
_Senate Exec. Doc._, 34 Cong. 1 sess. XV No. 99.)

~1856, Aug. 5.~ Report of the Secretary of State, in compliance with a
resolution of the Senate of April 24, calling for information relative
to the coolie trade. _Senate Exec. Doc._, 34 Cong. 1 sess. XV. No. 99.
(Partly reprinted in _House Exec Doc._, 34 Cong. 1 sess. XII. No. 105.)

~1856, Dec. 1.~ Report of the Secretary of the Navy. _House Exec. Doc._,
34 Cong. 3 sess. I. pt. 2, No. 1, pt. 2, p. 407.

~1857, Feb. 11.~ Slave Trade: Letter from the Secretary of State, asking
an appropriation for the suppression of the slave trade, etc. _House
Exec Doc._, 34 Cong. 3 sess. IX. No. 70.

~1857, Dec. 3.~ Report of the Secretary of the Navy. _House Exec Doc._,
35 Cong. 1 sess. II. pt. 3, No. 2, pt. 3, p. 576.

~1858, April 23.~ Message of the President ... communicating ... reports
of the Secretary of State and the Secretary of the Navy, with
accompanying papers, in relation to the African slave trade. _Senate
Exec. Doc._, 35 Cong. 1 sess. XII. No. 49. (Valuable.)

~1858, Dec. 6.~ Report of the Secretary of the Navy. _House Exec. Doc._,
35 Cong. 2 sess. II. pt. 4, No. 2, pt. 4, pp. 5, 13-4.

~1859, Jan. 12.~ Message of the President ... relative to the landing of
the barque Wanderer on the coast of Georgia, etc. _Senate Exec. Doc._,
35 Cong. 2 sess. VII. No. 8. See also _House Exec. Doc._, 35 Cong. 2
sess. IX. No. 89.

~1859, March 1.~ Instructions to African squadron: Message from the
President, etc. _House Exec. Doc._, 35 Cong. 2 sess. IX. No. 104.

~1859, Dec. 2.~ Report of the Secretary of the Navy. _Senate Exec.
Doc._, 36 Cong. 1 sess. III. No. 2, pt. 3, pp. 1138-9, 1149-50.

~1860, Jan. 25.~ Memorial of the American Missionary Association,
praying the rigorous enforcement of the laws for the suppression of the
African slave-trade, etc. _Senate Misc. Doc._, 36 Cong. 1 sess. No. 8.

~1860, April 24.~ Message from the President ... in answer to a
resolution of the House calling for the number of persons ... belonging
to the African squadron, who have died, etc. _House Exec. Doc._, 36
Cong. 1 sess. XII. No. 73.

~1860, May 19.~ Message of the President ... relative to the capture of
the slaver Wildfire, etc. _Senate Exec. Doc._, 36 Cong. 1 sess. XI. No.
44.

~1860, May 22.~ Capture of the slaver "William": Message from the
President ... transmitting correspondence relative to the capture of the
slaver "William," etc. _House Exec. Doc._, 36 Cong. 1 sess. XII. No. 83.

~1860, May 31.~ The Slave Trade ... Report: "The Committee on the
Judiciary, to whom was referred Senate Bill No. 464, ... together with
the messages of the President ... relative to the capture of the slavers
'Wildfire' and 'William,' ... respectfully report," etc. _House
Reports_, 36 Cong. 1 sess. IV. No. 602.

~1860, June 16.~ Recaptured Africans: Letter from the Secretary of the
Interior, on the subject of the return to Africa of recaptured Africans,
etc. _House Misc. Doc._, 36 Cong. 1 sess. VII. No. 96. Cf. _Ibid._, No.
97, p. 2.

~1860, Dec. 1.~ Report of the Secretary of the Navy. _Senate Exec.
Doc._, 36 Cong. 2 sess. III. pt. 1, No. 1, pt. 3, pp. 8-9.

~1860, Dec. 6.~ African Slave Trade: Message from the President ...
transmitting ... a report from the Secretary of State in reference to
the African slave trade. _House Exec. Doc._, 36 Cong. 2 sess. IV. No. 7.
(Voluminous document, containing chiefly correspondence, orders, etc.,
1855-1860.)

~1860, Dec. 17.~ Deficiencies of Appropriation, etc.: Letter from the
Secretary of the Interior, communicating estimates for deficiencies in
the appropriation for the suppression of the slave trade, etc. _House
Exec. Doc._, 36 Cong. 2 sess. V. No. 11. (Contains names of captured
slavers.)

~1861, July 4.~ Report of the Secretary of the Navy. _Senate Exec.
Doc._, 37 Cong. 1 sess. No. 1, pp. 92, 97.

~1861, Dec. 2.~ Report of the Secretary of the Navy. _Senate Exec.
Doc._, 37 Cong. 2 sess. Vol. III. pt. 1, No. 1, pt. 3, pp. 11, 21.

~1861, Dec. 18.~ In Relation to Captured Africans: Letter from the
Secretary of the Interior ... as to contracts for returning and
subsistence of captured Africans. _House Exec. Doc._, 37 Cong. 2 sess.
I. No. 12.

~1862, April 1.~ Letter of the Secretary of the Interior ... in relation
to the slave vessel the "Bark Augusta." _Senate Exec. Doc._, 37 Cong. 2
sess. V. No. 40.

~1862, May 30.~ Letter of the Secretary of the Interior ... in relation
to persons who have been arrested in the southern district of New York,
from the 1st day of May, 1852, to the 1st day of May, 1862, charged with
being engaged in the slave trade, etc. _Senate Exec. Doc._, 37 Cong. 2
sess. V. No. 53.

~1862, June 10.~ Message of the President ... transmitting a copy of the
treaty between the United States and her Britannic Majesty for the
suppression of the African slave trade. _Senate Exec. Doc._, 37 Cong. 2
sess. V. No. 57. (Also contains correspondence.)

~1862, Dec. 1.~ Report of the Secretary of the Navy. _House Exec. Doc._,
37 Cong. 3 sess. III. No. 1, pt. 3, p. 23.

~1863, Jan. 7.~ Liberated Africans: Letter from the Acting Secretary of
the Interior ... transmitting reports from Agent Seys in relation to
care of liberated Africans. _House Exec. Doc._, 37 Cong. 3 sess. V. No.
28.

~1864, July 2.~ Message of the President ... communicating ...
information in regard to the African slave trade. _Senate Exec. Doc._,
38 Cong. 1 sess. No. 56.

~1866-69.~ Reports of the Secretary of the Navy. _House Exec. Doc._, 39
Cong. 2 sess. IV. No. 1, pt. 6, pp. 12, 18-9; 40 Cong. 2 sess. IV. No.
1, p. 11; 40 Cong. 3 sess. IV. No. 1, p. ix; 41 Cong. 2 sess. I. No. 1,
pp. 4, 5, 9, 10.

~1870, March 2.~ [Resolution on the slave-trade submitted to the Senate
by Mr. Wilson]. _Senate Misc. Doc._, 41 Cong. 2 sess. No. 66.


~GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY.~

John Quincy Adams. Argument before the Supreme Court of the United
States, in the case of the United States, Appellants, _vs._ Cinque, and
Others, Africans, captured in the schooner Amistad, by Lieut. Gedney,
delivered on the 24th of Feb. and 1st of March, 1841. With a Review of
the case of the Antelope. New York, 1841.

An African Merchant (anon.). A Treatise upon the Trade from
Great-Britain to Africa; Humbly recommended to the Attention of
Government. London, 1772.

The African Slave Trade: Its Nature, Consequences, and Extent. From the
Leeds Mercury. [Birmingham, 183-.]

The African Slave Trade: The Secret Purpose of the Insurgents to Revive
it. No Treaty Stipulations against the Slave Trade to be entered into
with the European Powers, etc. Philadelphia, 1863.

George William Alexander. Letters on the Slave-Trade, Slavery, and
Emancipation, etc. London, 1842. (Contains Bibliography.)

American and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society; Reports.

American Anti-Slavery Society. Memorial for the Abolition of Slavery and
the Slave Trade. London, 1841.

----. Reports and Proceedings.

American Colonization Society. Annual Reports, 1818-1860. (Cf. above,
United States Documents.)

J.A. Andrew and A.G. Browne, proctors. Circuit Court of the United
States, Massachusetts District, ss. In Admiralty. The United States, by
Information, _vs._ the Schooner Wanderer and Cargo, G. Lamar, Claimant.
Boston, 1860.

Edward Armstrong, editor. The Record of the Court at Upland, in
Pennsylvania. 1676-1681. Philadelphia, 1860. (In _Memoirs_ of the
Pennsylvania Historical Society, VII. 11.)

Samuel Greene Arnold. History of the State of Rhode Island and
Providence Plantations. 2 vols. New York, 1859-60. (See Index to Vol.
II., "Slave Trade.")

Assiento, or, Contract for allowing to the Subjects of Great Britain the
Liberty of Importing Negroes into the Spanish America. Sign'd by the
Catholick King at Madrid, the Twenty sixth Day of March, 1713. By Her
Majesties special Command. London, 1713.

R.S. Baldwin. Argument before the Supreme Court of the United States, in
the case of the United States, Appellants, _vs._ Cinque, and Others,
Africans of the Amistad. New York, 1841.

James Bandinel. Some Account of the Trade in Slaves from Africa as
connected with Europe and America; From the Introduction of the Trade
into Modern Europe, down to the present Time; especially with reference
to the efforts made by the British Government for its extinction.
London, 1842.

Anthony Benezet. Inquiry into the Rise and Progress of the Slave Trade,
1442-1771. (In his Historical Account of Guinea, etc., Philadelphia,
1771.)

----. Notes on the Slave Trade, etc. [1780?].

Thomas Hart Benton. Abridgment of the Debates of Congress, from 1789 to
1856. 16 vols. Washington, 1857-61.

Edward Bettle. Notices of Negro Slavery, as connected with Pennsylvania.
(Read before the Historical Society of Pennsylvania, Aug. 7, 1826.
Printed in _Memoirs_ of the Historical Society of Pennsylvania, Vol. I.
Philadelphia, 1864.)

W.O. Blake. History of Slavery and the Slave Trade, Ancient and Modern.
Columbus, 1859.

Jeffrey R. Brackett. The Status of the Slave, 1775-1789. (Essay V. in
Jameson's _Essays in the Constitutional History of the United States,
1775-89_. Boston, 1889.)

Thomas Branagan. Serious Remonstrances, addressed to the Citizens of the
Northern States and their Representatives, on the recent Revival of the
Slave Trade in this Republic. Philadelphia, 1805.

British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society. Annual and Special Reports.

----. Proceedings of the general Anti-Slavery Convention, called by
the committee of the British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society, and held
in London, ... June, 1840. London, 1841.

[A British Merchant.] The African Trade, the Great Pillar and Support
of the British Plantation Trade in America: shewing, etc. London, 1745.

[British Parliament, House of Lords.] Report of the Lords of the
Committee of the Council appointed for the Confederation of all Matters
relating to Trade and Foreign Plantations, etc. 2 vols. [London,] 1789.

William Brodie. Modern Slavery and the Slave Trade: a Lecture, etc.
London, 1860.

Thomas Fowell Buxton. The African Slave Trade and its Remedy. London,
1840.

John Elliot Cairnes. The Slave Power: its Character, Career, and
Probable Designs. London, 1862.

Henry C. Carey. The Slave Trade, Domestic and Foreign: why it Exists and
how it may be Extinguished. Philadelphia, 1853.

[Lewis Cass]. An Examination of the Question, now in Discussion, ...
concerning the Right of Search. By an American. [Philadelphia, 1842.]

William Ellery Channing. The Duty of the Free States, or Remarks
suggested by the case of the Creole. Boston, 1842.

David Christy. Ethiopia, her Gloom and Glory, as illustrated in the
History of the Slave Trade, etc. (1442-1857.) Cincinnati, 1857.

Rufus W. Clark. The African Slave Trade. Boston, [1860.]

Thomas Clarkson. An Essay on the Comparative Efficiency of Regulation or
Abolition, as applied to the Slave Trade. Shewing that the latter only
can remove the evils to be found in that commerce. London, 1789.

----. An Essay on the Impolicy of the African Slave Trade. In two
parts. Second edition. London, 1788.

----. An Essay on the Slavery and Commerce of the Human Species,
particularly the African. London and Dublin, 1786.

----. The History of the Rise, Progress, and Accomplishment of the
Abolition of the African Slave-Trade, by the British Parliament. 2 vols.
Philadelphia, 1808.

Michael W. Cluskey. The Political Text-Book, or Encyclopedia ... for the
Reference of Politicians and Statesmen. Fourteenth edition.
Philadelphia, 1860.

T.R.R. Cobb. An Historical Sketch of Slavery, from the Earliest Periods.
Philadelphia and Savannah. 1858.

T.R.R. Cobb. Inquiry into the Law of Negro Slavery in the United States
of America. Vol. I. Philadelphia and Savannah, 1858.

Company of Royal Adventurers. The Several Declarations of the Company of
Royal Adventurers of England trading into Africa, inviting all His
Majesties Native Subjects in general to Subscribe, and become Sharers in
their Joynt-stock, etc. [London,] 1667.

Confederate States of America. By Authority of Congress: The Statutes at
Large of the Provisional Government of the Confederate States of
America, from the Institution of the Government, Feb. 8, 1861, to its
Termination, Feb. 18, 1862, Inclusive, etc. (Contains provisional and
permanent constitutions.) Edited by James M. Matthews. Richmond, 1864.

Constitution of a Society for Abolishing the Slave-Trade. With Several
Acts of the Legislatures of the States of Massachusetts, Connecticut and
Rhode-Island, for that Purpose. Printed by John Carter. Providence,
1789.

Continental Congress. Journals and Secret Journals.

Moncure D. Conway. Omitted Chapters of History disclosed in the Life and
Papers of Edmund Randolph, etc. New York and London, 1888.

Thomas Cooper. Letters on the Slave Trade. Manchester, Eng., 1787.

Correspondence with British Ministers and Agents in Foreign Countries,
and with Foreign Ministers in England, relative to the Slave Trade,
1859-60. London, 1860.

The Creole Case, and Mr. Webster's Despatch; with the comments of the
New York "American." New York, 1842.

B.R. Curtis. Reports of Decisions in the Supreme Court of the United
States. With Notes, and a Digest. Fifth edition. 22 vols. Boston, 1870.

James Dana. The African Slave Trade. A Discourse delivered ...
September, 9, 1790, before the Connecticut Society for the Promotion of
Freedom. New Haven, 1791.

Henry B. Dawson, editor. The Foederalist: A Collection of Essays,
written in favor of the New Constitution, as agreed upon by the
Foederal Convention, September 17, 1787. Reprinted from the Original
Text. With an Historical Introduction and Notes. Vol. I. New York,
1863.

Paul Dean. A Discourse delivered before the African Society ... in
Boston, Mass., on the Abolition of the Slave Trade ... July 14, 1819.
Boston, 1819.

Charles Deane. The Connection of Massachusetts with Slavery and the
Slave-Trade, etc. Worcester, 1886. (Also in _Proceedings_ of the
American Antiquarian Society, October, 1886.)

----. Charles Deane. Letters and Documents relating to Slavery in
Massachusetts. (In _Collections_ of the Massachusetts Historical
Society, 5th Series, III. 373.)

Debate on a Motion for the Abolition of the Slave-Trade, in the House of
Commons, on Monday and Tuesday, April 18 and 19, 1791. Reported in
detail. London, 1791.

J.D.B. De Bow. The Commercial Review of the South and West. (Also De
Bow's Review of the Southern and Western States.) 38 vols. New Orleans,
1846-69.

Franklin B. Dexter. Estimates of Population in the American Colonies.
Worcester, 1887.

Captain Richard Drake. Revelations of a Slave Smuggler: being the
Autobiography of Capt. Richard Drake, an African Trader for fifty
years--from 1807 to 1857, etc. New York, [1860.]

Daniel Drayton. Personal Memoir, etc. Including a Narrative of the
Voyage and Capture of the Schooner Pearl. Published by the American and
Foreign Anti-Slavery Society, Boston and New York, 1855.

John Drayton. Memoirs of the American Revolution. 2 vols. Charleston,
1821.

Paul Dudley. An Essay on the Merchandize of Slaves and Souls of Men.
Boston, 1731.

Edward E. Dunbar. The Mexican Papers, containing the History of the Rise
and Decline of Commercial Slavery in America, with reference to the
Future of Mexico. First Series, No. 5. New York, 1861.

Jonathan Edwards. The Injustice and Impolicy of the Slave Trade, and of
the Slavery of the Africans, etc. [New Haven,] 1791.

Jonathan Elliot. The Debates ... on the adoption of the Federal
Constitution, etc. 4 vols. Washington, 1827-30.

Emerson Etheridge. Speech ... on the Revival of the African Slave Trade,
etc. Washington, 1857.

Alexander Falconbridge. An Account of the Slave Trade on the Coast of
Africa. London, 1788.

Andrew H. Foote. Africa and the American Flag. New York, 1854.

----. The African Squadron: Ashburton Treaty; Consular Sea Letters.
Philadelphia, 1855.

Peter Force. American Archives, etc. In Six Series. Prepared and
Published under Authority of an act of Congress. Fourth and Fifth
Series. 9 vols. Washington, 1837-53.

Paul Leicester Ford. The Association of the First Congress, (In
Political Science Quarterly, VI. 613.)

----. Pamphlets on the Constitution of the United States, published
during its Discussion by the People, 1787-8. (With Bibliography, etc.)
Brooklyn, 1888.

William Chauncey Fowler. Local Law in Massachusetts and Connecticut,
Historically considered; and The Historical Status of the Negro, in
Connecticut, etc. Albany, 1872, and New Haven, 1875.

[Benjamin Franklin.] An Essay on the African Slave Trade. Philadelphia,
1790.

[Friends.] Address to the Citizens of the United States of America on
the subject of Slavery, etc. (At New York Yearly Meeting.) New York,
1837.

----. An Appeal on the Iniquity of Slavery and the Slave Trade. (At
London Yearly Meeting.) London and Cincinnati, 1844.

----. The Appeal of the Religious Society of Friends in Pennsylvania,
New Jersey, Delaware, etc., [Yearly Meeting] to their Fellow-Citizens of
the United States on behalf of the Coloured Races. Philadelphia, 1858.

----. A Brief Statement of the Rise and Progress of the Testimony of
the Religious Society of Friends against Slavery and the Slave Trade.
1671-1787. (At Yearly Meeting in Philadelphia.) Philadelphia, 1843.

----. The Case of our Fellow-Creatures, the Oppressed Africans,
respectfully recommended to the Serious Consideration of the Legislature
of Great-Britain, by the People called Quakers. (At London Meeting.)
London, 1783 and 1784. (This volume contains many tracts on the African
slave-trade, especially in the West Indies; also descriptions of trade,
proposed legislation, etc.)

[Friends.] An Exposition of the African Slave Trade, from the year 1840,
to 1850, inclusive. Prepared from official documents. Philadelphia,
1857.

----. Extracts and Observations on the Foreign Slave Trade.
Philadelphia, 1839.

----. Facts and Observations relative to the Participation of
American Citizens in the African Slave Trade. Philadelphia, 1841.

----. Faits relatifs Ã  la Traite des Noirs, et DÃ©tails sur Sierra
Leone; par la SociÃ©tÃ© des Ames. Paris, 1824.

----. Germantown Friends' Protest against Slavery, 1688. Fac-simile
Copy. Philadelphia, 1880.

----. Observations on the Inslaving, importing and purchasing of
Negroes; with some Advice thereon, extracted from the Epistle of the
Yearly-Meeting of the People called Quakers, held at London in the Year
1748. Second edition. Germantown, 1760.

----. Proceedings in relation to the Presentation of the Address of
the [Great Britain and Ireland] Yearly Meeting on the Slave-Trade and
Slavery, to Sovereigns and those in Authority in the nations of Europe,
and in other parts of the world, where the Christian religion is
professed. Cincinnati, 1855.

----. Slavery and the Domestic Slave Trade in the United States. By
the committee appointed by the late Yearly Meeting of Friends held in
Philadelphia, in 1839. Philadelphia, 1841.

----. A View of the Present State of the African Slave Trade.
Philadelphia, 1824.

Carl Garcis. Das Heutige VÃ¶lkerrecht und der Menschenhandel. Eine
vÃ¶lkerrechtliche Abhandlung, zugleich Ausgabe des deutschen Textes der
VertrÃ¤ge von 20. Dezember 1841 und 29. MÃ¤rz 1879. Berlin, 1879.

----. Der Sklavenhandel, das VÃ¶lkerrecht, und das deutsche Recht.
(In Deutsche Zeit- und Streit-Fragen, No. 13.) Berlin, 1885.

AgÃ©nor Ãtienne de Gasparin. Esclavage et Traite. Paris, 1838.

Joshua R. Giddings. Speech ... on his motion to reconsider the vote
taken upon the final passage of the "Bill for the relief of the owners
of slaves lost from on Board the Comet and Encomium." [Washington,
1843.]

Benjamin Godwin. The Substance of a Course of Lectures on British
Colonial Slavery, delivered at Bradford, York, and Scarborough. London,
1830.

----. Lectures on Slavery. From the London edition, with additions.
Edited by W.S. Andrews. Boston, 1836.

William Goodell. The American Slave Code in Theory and Practice: its
Distinctive Features shown by its Statutes, Judicial Decisions, and
Illustrative Facts. New York, 1853.

----. Slavery and Anti-Slavery; A History of the great Struggle in
both Hemispheres; with a view of the Slavery Question in the United
States. New York, 1852.

Daniel R. Goodloe. The Birth of the Republic. Chicago, [1889.]

[Great Britain.] British and Foreign State Papers.

----. Sessional Papers. (For notices of slave-trade in British
Sessional Papers, see Bates Hall Catalogue, Boston Public Library, pp.
347 _et seq._)

[Great Britain: Parliament.] Chronological Table and Index of the
Statutes, Eleventh Edition, to the end of the Session 52 and 53
Victoria, (1889.) By Authority. London, 1890.

[Great Britain: Record Commission.] The Statutes of the Realm. Printed
by command of His Majesty King George the Third ... From Original
Records and Authentic Manuscripts. 9 vols. London, 1810-22.

George Gregory. Essays, Historical and Moral. Second edition. London,
1788. (Essays 7 and 8: Of Slavery and the Slave Trade; A Short Review,
etc.)

Pope Gregory XVI. To Catholic Citizens! The Pope's Bull [for the
Abolition of the Slave Trade], and the words of Daniel O'Connell [on
American Slavery.] New York, [1856.]

H. Hall. Slavery in New Hampshire. (In _New England Register_, XXIX.
247.)

Isaac W. Hammond. Slavery in New Hampshire in the Olden Time. (In
_Granite Monthly_, IV. 108.)

James H. Hammond. Letters on Southern Slavery: addressed to Thomas
Clarkson. [Charleston, (?)].

Robert G. Harper. Argument against the Policy of Reopening the African
Slave Trade. Atlanta, Ga., 1858.

Samuel Hazard, editor. The Register of Pennsylvania. 16 vols.
Philadelphia, 1828-36.

Hinton R. Helper. The Impending Crisis of the South: How to Meet it.
Enlarged edition. New York, 1860.

Lewis and Sir Edward Hertslet, compilers. A Complete Collection of the
Treaties and Conventions, and Reciprocal Regulations, at present
subsisting between Great Britain and Foreign Powers, and of the Laws,
Decrees, and Orders in Council, concerning the same; so far as they
relate to Commerce and Navigation, ... the Slave Trade, etc. 17 vols.,
(Vol. XVI., Index.) London, 1840-90.

William B. Hodgson. The Foulahs of Central Africa, and the African Slave
Trade. [New York, (?)] 1843.

John Codman Hurd. The Law of Freedom and Bondage in the United States. 2
vols. Boston and New York, 1858, 1862.

----. The International Law of the Slave Trade, and the Maritime
Right of Search. (In the American Jurist, XXVI. 330.)

----. The Jamaica Movement, for promoting the Enforcement of the
Slave-Trade Treaties, and the Suppression of the Slave-Trade; with
statements of Fact, Convention, and Law: prepared at the request of the
Kingston Committee. London, 1850.

William Jay. Miscellaneous Writings on Slavery. Boston, 1853.

----. A View of the Action of the Federal Government, in Behalf of
Slavery. New York, 1839.

T. and J.W. Johnson. Inquiry into the Law of Negro Slavery in the United
States.

Alexandre Moreau de JonnÃ¨s. Recherches Statistiques sur l'Esclavage
Colonial et sur les Moyens de le supprimer. Paris, 1842.

M.A. Juge. The American Planter: or The Bound Labor Interest in the
United States. New York, 1854.

Friedrich Kapp. Die Sklavenfrage in den Vereinigten Staaten. GÃ¶ttingen
and New York, 1854.

----. Geschichte der Sklaverei in den Vereinigten Staaten von
Amerika. Hamburg, 1861.

Frederic Kidder. The Slave Trade in Massachusetts. (In _New-England
Historical and Genealogical Register_, XXXI. 75.)

George Lawrence. An Oration on the Abolition of the Slave Trade ... Jan.
1, 1813. New York, 1813.

William B. Lawrence. Visitation and Search; or, An Historical Sketch of
the British Claim to exercise a Maritime Police over the Vessels of all
Nations, in Peace as well as in War. Boston, 1858.

Letter from ... in London, to his Friend in America, on the ... Slave
Trade, etc. New York, 1784.

Thomas Lloyd. Debates of the Convention of the State of Pennsylvania on
the Constitution, proposed for the Government of the United States. In
two volumes. Vol. I. Philadelphia, 1788.

London Anti-Slavery Society. The Foreign Slave Trade, A Brief Account of
its State, of the Treaties which have been entered into, and of the Laws
enacted for its Suppression, from the date of the English Abolition Act
to the present time. London, 1837.

----. The Foreign Slave Trade, etc., No. 2. London, 1838.

London Society for the Extinction of the Slave Trade, and for the
Civilization of Africa. Proceedings at the first Public Meeting, held at
Exeter Hall, on Monday, 1st June, 1840. London, 1840.

Theodore Lyman, Jr. The Diplomacy of the United States, etc. Second
edition. 2 vols. Boston, 1828.

Hugh M'Call. The History of Georgia, containing Brief Sketches of the
most Remarkable Events, up to the Present Day. 2 vols. Savannah,
1811-16.

Marion J. McDougall. Fugitive Slaves. Boston, 1891.

John Fraser Macqueen. Chief Points in the Laws of War and Neutrality,
Search and Blockade, etc. London and Edinburgh, 1862.

R.R. Madden. A Letter to W.E. Channing, D.D., on the subject of the
Abuse of the Flag of the United States in the Island of Cuba, and the
Advantage taken of its Protection in promoting the Slave Trade. Boston,
1839.

James Madison. Letters and Other Writings of James Madison, Fourth
President of the United States. In four volumes. Published by order of
Congress. Philadelphia, 1865.

James Madison. The Papers of James Madison, purchased by order of
Congress; being his Correspondence and Reports of Debates during the
Congress of the Confederation and his Reports of Debates in the Federal
Convention. 3 vols. Washington, 1840.

Marana (pseudonym). The Future of America. Considered ... in View of ...
Re-opening the Slave Trade. Boston, 1858.

E. Marining. Six Months on a Slaver. New York, 1879.

George C. Mason. The African Slave Trade in Colonial Times. (In American
Historical Record, I. 311, 338.)

Frederic G. Mather. Slavery in the Colony and State of New York. (In
_Magazine of American History_, XI. 408.)

Samuel May, Jr. Catalogue of Anti-Slavery Publications in America,
1750-1863. (Contains bibliography of periodical literature.)

Memorials presented to the Congress of the United States of America, by
the Different Societies instituted for promoting the Abolition of
Slavery, etc., etc., in the States of Rhode-Island, Connecticut,
New-York, Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Virginia. Philadelphia, 1792.

Charles F. Mercer. MÃ©moires relatifs Ã  l'Abolition de la Traite
Africaine, etc. Paris, 1855.

C.W. Miller. Address on Re-opening the Slave Trade ... August 29, 1857.
Columbia, S.C., 1857.

George H. Moore. Notes on the History of Slavery in Massachusetts. New
York, 1866.

----. Slavery in Massachusetts. (In _Historical Magazine_, XV. 329.)

Jedidiah Morse. A Discourse ... July 14, 1808, in Grateful Celebration
of the Abolition of the African Slave-Trade by the Governments of the
United States, Great Britain and Denmark. Boston, 1808.

John Pennington, Lord Muncaster. Historical Sketches of the Slave Trade
and its effect on Africa, addressed to the People of Great Britain.
London, 1792.

Edward Needles. An Historical Memoir of the Pennsylvania Society, for
Promoting the Abolition of Slavery. Philadelphia, 1848.

New England Anti-Slavery Convention. Proceedings at Boston, May 27,
1834. Boston, 1834.

Hezekiah Niles (_et al._), editors. The Weekly Register, etc. 71 vols.
Baltimore, 1811-1847. (For Slave-Trade, see I. 224; III. 189; V. 30, 46;
VI. 152; VII. 54, 96, 286, 350; VIII. 136, 190, 262, 302, Supplement, p.
155; IX. 60, 78, 133, 172, 335; X. 296, 400, 412, 427; XI. 15, 108, 156,
222, 336, 399; XII. 58, 60, 103, 122, 159, 219, 237, 299, 347, 397,
411.)

Robert Norris. A Short Account of the African Slave-Trade. A new edition
corrected. London, 1789.

E.B. O'Callaghan, translator. Voyages of the Slavers St. John and Arms
of Amsterdam, 1659, 1663; with additional papers illustrative of the
Slave Trade under the Dutch. Albany, 1867. (New York Colonial Tracts,
No. 3.)

Frederick Law Olmsted. A Journey in the Back Country. New York, 1860.

----. A Journey in the Seaboard Slave States, etc. New York, 1856.

----. A Journey through Texas, etc. New York, 1857.

----. The Cotton Kingdom, etc. 2 vols. New York, 1861.

Sir W.G. Ouseley. Notes on the Slave Trade; with Remarks on the Measures
adopted for its Suppression. London, 1850.

Pennsylvania Historical Society. The Charlemagne Tower Collection of
American Colonial Laws. (Bibliography.) Philadelphia, 1890.

Edward A. Pollard. Black Diamonds gathered in the Darkey Homes of the
South. New York, 1859.

William F. Poole. Anti-Slavery Opinions before the Year 1800. To which
is appended a fac-simile reprint of Dr. George Buchanan's Oration on the
Moral and Political Evil of Slavery, etc. Cincinnati, 1873.

Robert Proud. History of Pennsylvania. 2 vols. Philadelphia. 1797-8.

[James Ramsay.] An Inquiry into the Effects of putting a Stop to the
African Slave Trade, and of granting Liberty to the Slaves in the
British Sugar Colonies. London, 1784.

[James Ramsey.] Objections to the Abolition of the Slave Trade, with
Answers, etc. Second edition. London, 1788.

[John Ranby.] Observations on the Evidence given before the Committees
of the Privy Council and House of Commons in Support of the Bill for
Abolishing the Slave Trade. London, 1791.

Remarks on the Colonization of the Western Coast of Africa, by the Free
Negroes of the United States, etc. New York, 1850.

Right of Search. Reply to an "American's Examination" of the "Right of
Search, etc." By an Englishman. London, 1842.

William Noel Sainsbury, editor. Calendar of State Papers, Colonial
Series, America and the West Indies, 1574-1676. 4 vols. London, 1860-93.

George Sauer. La Traite et l'Esclavage des Noirs. London, 1863.

George S. Sawyer. Southern Institutes; or, An Inquiry into the Origin
and Early Prevalence of Slavery and the Slave-Trade. Philadelphia, 1858.

Selections from the Revised Statutes: Containing all the Laws relating
to Slaves, etc. New York, 1830.

Johann J. Sell. Versuch einer Geschichte des Negersclavenhandels. Halle,
1791.

[Granville Sharp.] Extract of a Letter to a Gentleman in Maryland;
Wherein is demonstrated the extreme wickedness of tolerating the Slave
Trade. Fourth edition. London, 1806.

A Short Account of that part of Africa Inhabited by the Negroes, ... and
the Manner by which the Slave Trade is carried on. Third edition.
London, 1768.

A Short Sketch of the Evidence for the Abolition of the Slave-Trade.
Philadelphia, 1792.

Joseph Sidney. An Oration commemorative of the Abolition of the Slave
Trade in the United States.... Jan. 2. 1809. New York, 1809.

[A Slave Holder.] Remarks upon Slavery and the Slave-Trade, addressed to
the Hon. Henry Clay. 1839.

The Slave Trade in New York. (In the _Continental Monthly_, January,
1862, p. 86.)

Joseph Smith. A Descriptive Catalogue of Friends' Books. (Bibliography.)
2 vols. London, 1867.

Capt. William Snelgrave. A New Account of some Parts of Guinea, and the
Slave-Trade. London, 1734.

South Carolina. General Assembly (House), 1857. Report of the Special
Committee of the House of Representatives ... on so much of the Message
of His Excellency Gov. Jas. H. Adams, as relates to Slavery and the
Slave Trade. Columbia, S.C., 1857.

L.W. Spratt. A Protest from South Carolina against a Decision of the
Southern Congress: Slave Trade in the Southern Congress. (In Littell's
_Living Age_, Third Series, LXVIII. 801.)

----. Speech upon the Foreign Slave Trade, before the Legislature of
South Carolina. Columbia, S.C., 1858.

----. The Foreign Slave Trade the Source of Political Power, etc.
Charleston, 1858.

William Stith. The History of the First Discovery and Settlement of
Virginia. Virginia and London, 1753.

George M. Stroud. A Sketch of the Laws relating to Slavery in the
Several States of the United States of America. Philadelphia, 1827.

James Swan. A Dissuasion to Great-Britain and the Colonies: from the
Slave-Trade to Africa. Shewing the Injustice thereof, etc. Revised and
Abridged. Boston, 1773.

F.T. Texugo. A Letter on the Slave Trade still carried on along the
Eastern Coast of Africa, etc. London, 1839.

R. Thorpe. A View of the Present Increase of the Slave Trade, the Cause
of that Increase, and a mode for effecting its total Annihilation.
London, 1818.

Jesse Torrey. A Portraiture of Domestic Slavery ... and a Project of
Colonial Asylum for Free Persons of Colour. Philadelphia, 1817.

Drs. Tucker and Belknap. Queries respecting the Slavery and Emancipation
of Negroes in Massachusetts, proposed by the Hon. Judge Tucker of
Virginia, and answered by the Rev. Dr. Belknap. (In Collections of the
Massachusetts Historical Society, First Series, IV. 191.)

David Turnbull. Travels in the West. Cuba; with Notices of Porto Rico,
and the Slave Trade. London, 1840.

United States Congress. Annals of Congress, 1789-1824; Congressional
Debates, 1824-37; Congressional Globe, 1833-73; Congressional Record,
1873-; Documents (House and Senate); Executive Documents (House and
Senate); Journals (House and Senate); Miscellaneous Documents (House and
Senate); Reports (House and Senate); Statutes at Large.

United States Supreme Court. Reports of Decisions.

Charles W. Upham. Speech in the House of Representatives, Massachusetts,
on the Compromises of the Constitution, with an Appendix containing the
Ordinance of 1787. Salem, 1849.

Virginia State Convention. Proceedings and Debates, 1829-30. Richmond,
1830.

G. Wadleigh. Slavery in New Hampshire. (In _Granite Monthly_, VI. 377.)

Emory Washburn. Extinction of Slavery in Massachusetts. (In Proceedings
of the Massachusetts Historical Society, May, 1857. Boston, 1859.)

William B. Weeden. Economic and Social History of New England,
1620-1789. 2 vols. Boston, 1890.

Henry Wheaton. Enquiry into the Validity of the British Claim to a Right
of Visitation and Search of American Vessels suspected to be engaged in
the African Slave-Trade. Philadelphia, 1842.

William H. Whitmore. The Colonial Laws of Massachusetts. Reprinted from
the Edition of 1660, with the Supplements to 1772. Containing also the
Body of Liberties of 1641. Boston, 1889.

George W. Williams. History of the Negro Race in America from 1619 to
1880. 2 vols. New York, 1883.

Henry Wilson. History of the Antislavery Measures of the Thirty-seventh
and Thirty-eighth United-States Congresses, 1861-64. Boston, 1864.

----. History of the Rise and Fall of the Slave Power in America. 3
vols. Boston, 1872-7.


FOOTNOTES:

[1]  The Reports of the Secretary of the Navy are found among
the documents accompanying the annual messages of the President.

                    *       *       *       *       *




Index


ABOLITION of slave-trade by Europe, 145 n.

Abolition Societies, organization of, 42, 74;
  petitions of, 79, 80-85.

Adams, C.F., 151.

Adams, J.Q., on Right of Search, 139;
  proposes Treaty of 1824, 140;
  message, 271-72.

Adams, Governor of S.C., message on slave-trade, 169, 170, 289-90.

Advertisements for smuggled slaves, 182 n.

Africa, English trade to, 10, 12-13;
  Dutch trade to, 24-25;
  Colonial trade to, 26, 35, 36, 41-42, 47, 75, 76;
  "Association" and trade to, 47, 52;
  American trade to, 88, 112, 113, 116, 148, 179, 180, 181-82, 185-87;
  reopening of trade to, 168-92.

African Agency, establishment, 124, 126;
  attempts to abolish, 156;
  history, 158.

"African Labor Supply Association," 176.

African Society of London, 113.

African squadron, establishment of, 123, 124;
  activity of, 128, 129, 146, 148, 157, 159, 184, 185, 186, 191.

Aix-la-Chapelle, Peace, 11;
  Congress, 137 n.

Alabama, in Commercial Convention, 170;
  State statutes, 112, 254, 263-64, 287-88.

Alston, speeches on Act of 1807, 99 n., 101 n., 102 n.

Amelia Island, illicit traffic at, 116, 117, 121, 254;
  capture of, 118, 257.

Amendments to slave-trade clause in Constitution proposed, 72, 94,
  111 n., 183, 248-51, 253, 258, 266, 298, 299.

American Missionary Society, petition, 182.

"L'Amistad," case of, 143, 311.

Anderson, minister to Colombia, 142 n.

"Antelope" ("Ramirez"), case of, 129 n., 132, 284.

"Apprentices," African, importation of, 172, 177;
  Louisiana bill on, 177;
  Congressional bill on, 183.

Appropriations to suppress the slave-trade, chronological list of, 125 n.;
  from 1820 to 1850, 157-58;
  from 1850 to 1860, 183;
  from 1860 to 1870, 190;
  statutes, 255, 265, 272-76, 277-78, 285, 286-89, 291, 294, 297, 300,
    301, 304.

Argentine Confederation, 144 n.

Arkansas, 170.

Arkwright, Richard, 152.

Ashmun, Jehudi, 158.

Assiento treaty, 4, 206, 207;
  influence of, 7, 22, 45.

"Association," the, reasons leading to, 47, 48;
  establishment of, 50, 51;
  results of, 52-53.

Atherton, J., speech of, 72.

"Augusta," case of the slaver, 315.

Aury, Capt., buccaneer, 116.

Austria, at Congress of Vienna, 155-56;
  at Congress of Verona, 139-40;
  signs Quintuple Treaty, 147, 281.

Ayres, Eli, U.S. African agent, 158;
  report of, 128, 129.


BABBIT, William, slave-trader, 131 n.

Bacon, Samuel, African agent, 126, 158.

Badger, Joseph, slave-trader, 131 n.

Baldwin, Abraham, in Federal Convention, 59, 60, 63, 65;
  in Congress, 81, 108.

Baltimore, slave-trade at, 131-32, 165, 166.

Banks, N.P., 192, 305.

Barancas, Fort, 120.

Barbadoes, 12.

Bard (of Pa.), Congressman, 90.

Barksdale, Wm. (of Miss.), 175.

Barnwell, Robert (of S.C.), 70.

Barry, Robert, slave-trader, 165.

Bay Island slave-depot, 166.

Bayard, J.A. (of Del.), Congressman, 87.

Bedinger, G.M. (of Ky.), 89 n.

Belgium, 150.

Belknap, J. (of Mass.), 77.

Benezet, Anthony, 29.

Benton, Thomas H., 140, 156, 285.

Betton (of N.H.), Congressman, 109 n.

Biblical Codes of Law, 26, 37, 44 n.

Bidwell (of Mass.), Congressman, 99 n., 100 n., 102 n., 104 n., 108-10,
    111, 252.

Blanco and Caballo, slave-traders, 165.

Bland, T. (of Va.), Congressman, 81.

Bolivia, 144 n.

Border States, interstate slave-trade from, 155;
  legislation of, 76;
  see also under individual States.

Boston, slave-trade at, 37, 85, 166, 184.

Bozal Negroes, 166.

Braddock's Expedition, 21.

Bradley, S.R., Senator, 98, 107, 108.

Brazil, slave-trade to, 25, 114, 144, 163, 164, 171, 179, 275;
  slaves in, 133;
  proposed conference with, 150;
  squadron on coasts of, 160.

Brazos Santiago, 180.

Brown (of Miss.), Congressman, 175.

Brown, John (of Va.), slave-trader, 52.

Brown, John (of R.I.), 85-87.

Buchanan, James A., refuses to co-operate with England, 151;
  issues "Ostend Manifesto," 177;
  as president, enforces slave-trade laws, 186;
  messages, 291, 294-95, 298.

Buchanan, Governor of Sierra Leone, 164.

Bullock, Collector of Revenue, 116.

Burgesses, Virginia House of, petitions vs. slave-trade, 21;
  declares vs. slave-trade, 21;
  in "Association," 48.

Burke, Aedanus (of S.C.), 78-80.

Butler, Pierce (of S.C.), Senator, 65.


CALHOUN, J.C., 155 n.

California, vessels bound to, 162.

Campbell, John, Congressman, 108.

Campbell, Commander, U.S.N., 118 n.

Canning, Stratford, British Minister, 138, 140.

Canot, Capt., slave-trader, 184.

Cape de Verde Islands, 185.

Cartwright, Edmund, 152.

Cass, Lewis, 147-51, 281.

Castlereagh, British Cabinet Minister, 135, 136.

Cato, insurrection of the slave, 18.

"Centinel," newspaper correspondent, 67.

Central America, 177.

Chandalier Islands, 119.

Chandler, John (of N.H.), 104 n.

Charles II., of England, 10.

Charleston, S.C., attitude toward "Association," 49;
  slave-trade at, 89, 92, 93, 96, 113, 165.

Chew, Beverly, Collector of Revenue, 116, 118.

Chili, 150.

Chittenden, Martin (of Vt.), 109 n.

Claiborne, Wm., Governor of La., 92.

Clarkson, William, 53, 134.

Clay, J.B. (of Ky.), Congressman, 175.

Clay, Congressman, 102 n.

Clearance of slavers, 157, 162, 164, 184, 280, 287, 288.

Clymer, George (of Pa.), 63, 77.

Coastwise slave-trade, 98, 106-09, 156, 161, 183, 191, 302.

Cobb, Howell, Sec. of the Treasury, 177.

Coles (of Va.), Congressman, 81.

Colombia, U.S. of, 142, 270.

Colonies, legislation of, see under individual Colonies, and Appendix A;
  slave-trade in, 11, 13, 22, 25, 34-36, 46-47, 53-56;
  status of slavery in, 13-14, 23, 24, 33-34, 44, 199, 200.

Colonization Society, 126, 156 n., 158, 196.

"Comet," case of the slaver, 143, 309.

Commercial conventions, Southern, 169-73.

Company of Merchants Trading to Africa, 11.

Compromises in Constitution, 62-66, 196-98.

Compton, Samuel, 152.

Confederate States of America, 187-90, 299, 300.

Confederation, the, 56-57, 228.

Congress of the United States, 77-111,
    112, 121-26, 128, 131, 156-58, 174, 190-92, 239, 247-66, 268, 271-75,
    278-81, 284-94, 295-97, 298-99, 301-02, 304-05.

Congress of Verona, 139.

Congress of Vienna, 135, 137.

Connecticut, restrictions in, 43-44, 57;
  elections in, 178;
  Colonial and State legislation, 199, 200, 223, 225, 236, 240.

"Constitution," slaver, 120, 121, 307.

Constitution of the United States, 58-73, 78, 79-83, 94, 102-03, 107,
    111 n., 139, 183, 196, 248-51, 253, 258, 266, 298, 299.
  See also Amendments and Compromises.

Continental Congress, 49-52.

Cook, Congressman, 100 n., 103 n., 108.

Cosby, Governor of N.Y., 27.

Cotton, manufacture of, 152, 153;
  price of, 153-54;
  crop of, 154.

Cotton-gin, 153.

Coxe, Tench, 68.

Cranston, Governor of R.I., 41.

Crawford, W.H., Secretary, 119, 175.

"Creole," case of the slaver, 143, 283-84, 312.

Crimean war, 154.

Cruising Conventions, 138, 139, 146, 148-49, 285, 289, 292, 297-98.

Cuba, cruising off, 151, 297;
  movement to acquire, 155, 177, 186;
  illicit traffic to and from, 161, 162, 164, 166, 171.

Cumberland, Lieut., R.N., 149.

"Cyane," U.S.S., 129.


DANA (of Conn.), Congressman, 86.

Danish slave-trade, 47.

Darien, Ga., 51, 117.

Davis, Jefferson, 175.

De Bow, J.D.B., 172, 176.

Declaration of Independence, 53-54.

Delaware, restrictions in, 31, 56, 76;
  attitude toward slave-trade, 64, 72 n., 74;
  Colonial and State statutes, 225, 226, 232, 238-39, 244.

Denmark, abolition of slave-trade, 133, 247.

Dent (of Md.), Congressman, 87.

Dickinson, John, in the Federal Convention, 59, 60, 63.

Dickson (of N.C.), Congressman, 87.

Disallowance of Colonial acts, 11, 12, 18-19, 21, 27, 29, 32, 42.

Dobbs, Governor of N.C., 12.

Dolben, Sir William, M.P., 134.

Douglas, Stephen A., 181.

Dowdell (of Ala.), Congressman, 175.

Drake, Capt., slave-smuggler, 114, 166.

Driscoll, Capt., slave-trader, 184.

Duke of York's Laws, 26, 200.

Dunmore, Lord, 226.

Dutch. See Holland.

Dutch West India Company, 25.

Duty, on African goods, 10;
  on slaves imported, 10, 11, 12, 16-22, 26-32, 38, 40-42, 59, 62-66,
    67, 68, 77-84, 89, 90, 95, 96, 196, 199-206, 208-27, 229, 232, 239,
    247, 250.

Dwight, Theodore, of Conn., 105 n.


EARLY, Peter (of Ga.), 99 n., 100, 102, 104-08, 111.

East Indies, 50.

Economic revolution, 152-54.

Edwards (of N.C.), Congressman, 122 n.

Ellsworth, Oliver (of Conn.), in Federal Convention, 58, 59, 61.

Elmer, Congressman, 106 n.

Ely, Congressman, 103 n., 105 n.

Emancipation of slaves, 31, 39, 42, 44, 68, 70, 76, 79-84, 192, 196,
    226-29.

"Encomium," case of, 143, 309.

England, slave-trade policy, 9-14, 25, 30, 42, 46-50, 53, 54, 97, 134-51,
    153, 191, 206, 207, 208, 252, 254, 256, 259, 265-69, 275, 276, 281,
    285, 297, 301, 302, 303, 305.
  See Disallowance.

English Colonies. See Colonies.

"Enterprise," case of, 143, 309.

Escambia River, 114.


FAIRFAX County, Virginia, 49.

Faneuil Hall, meeting in, 48.

Federalist, the, on slave-trade, 69.

Fernandina, port of, 116.

Filibustering expeditions, 177.

Findley, Congressman, 103 n.

Fisk, Congressman, 100 n.

Florida, 52, 102, 114, 116, 120, 166, 170, 180, 181.
  See St. Mary's River and Amelia Island.

Foote, H.S. (of Miss.), 172.

Forsyth, John, Secretary of State, 144, 146, 156 n., 176.

Foster (of N.H.), Congressman, 81.

Fowler, W.C., 112-13.

Fox, C.J., English Cabinet Minister, 135 n.

France, Revolution in, 133;
  Colonial slave-trade of, 46, 92, 133, 254;
  Convention of, 86, 133;
  at Congress of Vienna, 135;
  at Congress of Verona, 139;
  treaties with England, 143, 150, 275, 276;
  flag of, in slave-trade, 144;
  refuses to sign Quintuple Treaty, 147;
  invited to conference, 150.

Franklin, Benjamin, 80.

Friends, protest of, vs. slave-trade, 28-29;
  attitude towards slave-trade, 30-31, 33, 43, 68-69, 77, 204;
  petitions of, vs. slave-trade, 56, 57, 77, 84;
  reports of, on slave-trade, 167.


GAILLARD, Congressman, 108.

Gallatin, Albert, 91-92.

Gallinas, port of, Africa, 128.

Galveston, Tex., 115.

Garnett (of Va.), Congressman, 109 n.

"General Ramirez." See "Antelope."

Georgia, slavery in, 13, 14;
  restrictions in, 15, 16, 75, 176-77;
  opposition to "Association," 51, 52;
  demands slave-trade, 16, 55, 60-67;
  attitude toward restrictions, 80, 81, 84, 132;
  smuggling to, 89, 95, 102, 114, 116, 117, 180, 181;
  Colonial and State statutes, 112, 215, 241, 244, 245, 257, 259, 276-77.

Germanic Federation, 150.

Gerry, Elbridge, in the Federal Convention, 59, 60;
  in Congress, 80, 81.

Ghent, Treaty of, 136, 254.

Giddings, J.R., 183 n., 284, 287.

Giles, W.B. (of Va.), Congressman, 108.

Gordon, Capt., slave-trader, 190 n.

Good Hope, Cape of, 151, 160, 191.

Gorham, N. (of Mass.), in Federal Convention, 58, 65.

Goulden, W.B., 169.

Graham, Secretary of the Navy, 185.

Great Britain. See England.

Gregory XVI., Pope, 145.

Grenville-Fox ministry, 134.

Guadaloupe, 88.

Guinea. See Africa.

Guizot, F., French Foreign Minister, 147.


HABERSHAM, R.W., 130 n.

Hamilton, Alexander, 58.

Hanse Towns, 142.

Harmony and Co., slave-traders, 165.

Harper (of S.C.), Congressman, 92.

Hartley, David, 80, 81.

Hastings, Congressman, 105 n.

Havana, Cuba, 119, 120, 145, 162, 165.

Hawkins, Sir John, 9.

Hayti, 144 n.;
  influence of the revolution, 74-77, 84-88, 96-97.
  See San Domingo.

Heath, General, of Mass., 71.

Henderick, Garrett, 28.

Hill (of N.C.), Congressman, 85.

Holland, participation of, in slave-trade, 24, 25, 47;
  slaves in Colonies, 133;
  abolishes slave-trade, 136;
  treaty with England, 137, 259;
  West India Company, 25.

Holland, Congressman, 99 n., 103, 106 n.

Hopkins, John, slave-trader, 131 n.

Hopkins, Samuel, 41.

Horn, Cape, 160, 162.

Huger (of S.C.), Congressman, 87, 91 n.

Hunter, Andrew, 169 n.

Hunter, Governor of N.J., 32.

Hutchinson, Wm., Governor of Mass., 38.


IMPORT duties on slaves. See Duty.

Indians, 29.

Instructions to Governors, 12, 18-19, 27, 30, 33, 36;
  to naval officers, 119, 161, 185.
  See Disallowance.

Insurrections. See Slaves.

Iredell, James (of N.C.), 67, 71.

Ireland, 48.


JACKSON, Andrew, pardons slave-traders, 131 n.

Jackson, J. (of Ga.), 78, 80, 81.

Jacksonville, Fla., 181.

Jamaica, 12.

Jay, William, 134-35.

Jefferson, Thomas, drafts Declaration of Independence, 53, 54;
  as President, messages on slave-trade, 92, 97-98, 251;
  signs Act of 1807, 110;
  pardons slave-traders, 131 n.

Jefferson, Capt, slave-trader, 184.

Johnson (of Conn.), 50, 63.

Johnson (of La.), 141.

Joint-cruising. See Cruising Conventions.


KANE, Commissioner, 162.

Keitt, L.M. (of S.C.), Congressman, 175.

Kelly, Congressman, 108.

Kenan, Congressman, 108.

Kendall, Amos, 126 n.

Kennedy, Secretary of the Navy, 185.

Kentucky, 108 n., 170 n., 172 n.

Key West, 185.

Kilgore, resolutions in Congress, 175, 293.

King, Rufus, in Federal Convention, 59, 63, 65.

Knoxville, Tenn., 170.


LA COSTE, Capt., slave-trader, 131.

Lafitte, E., and Co., 177.

Langdon, John, 59, 60, 63, 65.

Lawrence (of N.Y.), 80, 81.

Laws. See Statutes.

Lee, Arthur, 48 n.

Lee, R.H., 48 n., 49.

Legislation. See Statutes.

Le Roy, L., slave-trader, 131 n.

Liberia, 124, 158.
  See African Agency.

Lincoln, Abraham, 111, 126, 151, 190, 300-01.

Liverpool, Eng., 53, 145.

Livingstone (of N.Y.), in Federal Convention, 63.

Lloyd, Congressman, 102 n., 106 n.

London, Eng., 135, 137, 137 n., 147, 150, 154 n.

"Louisa," slaver, 120, 121.

Louisiana, sale of, 74, 97;
  slave-trade to, 75, 91-94;
  influence on S.C. repeal of 1803, 89;
  status of slave-trade to, 91-94, 171;
  State statutes, 177, 291.

Low, I. (of N.Y.), 50.

Lowndes, R. (of S.C.), 72, 89 n., 90.


MCCARTHY, Governor of Sierra Leone, 115.

McGregor Raid, the, 116.

McIntosh, Collector of Revenue, 117 n.

McKeever, Lieut., U.S.N., 120, 121.

Macon, N., 100, 102 n., 109.

Madeira, 185.

Madison, James, in the Federal Convention, 59, 63, 64;
  in Congress, 78-81;
  as President, 113, 115, 137 n., 254, 255-56.

Madrid, Treaty of, 257.

Maine, 166.

Manchester, Eng., 47.

Mansfield, Capt., slave-trader, 184.

"Marino," slaver, 120, 121.

Martin, Luther (of Md.), in the Federal Convention, 59, 61, 63, 65.

Maryland, slavery in, 14;
  restrictions in, 22, 23, 57, 76;
  attitude toward slave-trade, 65, 74, 83, 94;
  Colonial and State statutes, 201, 202, 209, 210, 219-20, 221, 223, 226,
    229, 243, 251.

Mason, George, 59, 61, 65-67, 71.

Mason, J.M., 177.

Massachusetts, in slave-trade, 34-36;
  restrictions in, 37-39, 77;
  attitude toward slave-trade, 71, 77, 83, 94;
  Colonial and State legislation, 199, 201, 203, 214, 223, 224, 228, 234,
    248, 249, 261.

Masters, Congressman, 99 n.

Mathew, Capt., slave-trader, 184.

Mathew, Governor of the Bahama Islands, 167.

Matthews (of S.C.), 56.

Meigs, Congressman, 132 n., 262.

Memphis, Tenn., 181.

Mercer, John (of Va.), 139 n., 142, 156 n.

Messages, Presidential, 97-98, 113, 115, 141, 148, 157, 163, 251, 254,
    255-60, 262, 264, 269, 271, 279, 280-81, 285, 291, 292, 294-95, 298,
    300-01.

Mesurado, Cape, 126, 158.

Mexico, treaty with England, 144 n.;
  conquest of, 155, 161, 177.

Mexico, Gulf of, 118, 159, 160, 166 n.

Mickle, Calvin, 121.

Middle Colonies, 24, 33, 57, 66.

Middleton (of S.C.), Congressman, 126.

Middletown, Conn., 43.

Mifflin, W. (of Penn.), in Continental Congress, 50.

Miles (of S.C.), Congressman, 175.

Mississippi, slavery in, 91;
  illicit trade to, 102;
  legislation, 112, 254, 263, 283, 284.

Missouri, 123.

Missouri Compromise, 124.

Mitchell, Gen. D.B., 118.

Mitchell, S.L. (of N.Y.), Congressman, 89 n.

Mixed courts for slave-traders, 137, 139, 151, 191.

Mobile, Ala., illicit trade to, 118, 119, 161, 181.

Monroe, James, as President, messages on slave-trade, 117, 141, 257, 258,
    259-60, 262-63, 265, 269;
  establishment of African Agency, 126, 158;
  pardons, 131 n.

Morbon, Wm., slave-trader, 131 n.

Morris, Gouverneur, in Federal Convention, 59, 63, 64, 65.

Morris, Governor of N.J., 33.

Moseley, Congressman, 106.


NANSEMOND County, Va., 49.

Naples (Two Sicilies), 142.

Napoleon I., 74, 134, 136, 254.

Navigation Ordinance, 25.

Navy, United States, 111, 115, 118-20, 123, 124, 128, 159-61, 163, 184-86,
    191, 259, 286, 295, 301;
  reports of Secretary of, 185, 186, 318-31.

Neal, Rev. Mr., in Mass. Convention, 71.

Negroes, character of, 13-14.
  See Slaves.

Negro plots, 18, 30, 204.

Nelson, Hugh (of Va.), 122 n., 123 n.

Nelson, Attorney-General, 162.

Netherlands. See Holland.

New England, slavery in, 14, 34, 44;
  slave-trade by, 34-36, 43, 57;
  Colonial statutes, see under individual Colonies.

New Hampshire, restrictions in, 36, 37;
  attitude toward slave-trade, 34, 72, 94;
  State legislation, 250.

New Jersey, slavery in, 14;
  restrictions in, 32, 33, 76;
  attitude toward slavery, 64, 74, 178;
  Colonial and State statutes, 200, 205, 221, 222, 225, 230, 244.

New Mexico, 176.

New Netherland, 24, 199, 200.

New Orleans, illicit traffic to, 92, 115, 131 n., 161, 166, 171, 179.

Newport, R.I., 35, 41.

New York, slavery in, 14;
  restrictions in, 25-27;
  Abolition societies in, 74, 83;
  Colonial and State statutes, 203-04, 210, 213, 214, 218, 229-30, 234,
    239, 245-46.

New York City, illicit traffic at, 162, 166, 178-81, 190, 191.

Nichols (of Va.), Congressman, 87.

Norfolk, Va., 162.

North Carolina, restrictions in, 19, 57, 76;
  "Association" in, 48, 55;
  reception of Constitution, 65, 71;
  cession of back-lands, 91;
  Colonial and State statutes, 112, 232, 241, 242, 255.

Northwest Territory, 91.

Nourse, Joseph, Registrar of the Treasury, 120 n.

Nova Scotia, 52.

Nunez River, Africa, 129.


OGLETHORPE, General James, 15.

Olin (of Vt.), Congressman, 105 n.

Ordinance of 1787, 91.

"Ostend Manifesto," 177.


PAGE, John (of Va.), 81.

Palmerston, Lord, 146.

Panama Congress, 142 n.

Pardons granted to slave-traders, 131 n.

Paris, France, Treaty of, 134, 135, 137 n.

Parker, R.E. (of Va.), 77-78, 81.

Parliament, slave-trade in, 10, 134.

Pastorius, F.D., 28.

Paterson's propositions, 58.

Peace negotiations of 1783, 134.

Pemberton, Thomas, 34.

Pennsylvania, slavery in, 14;
  restrictions in, 28-31, 76;
  attitude towards slave-trade, 56, 67, 70, 80, 83;
  in Constitutional Convention, 64;
  Colonial and State statutes, 201-05, 209, 211, 213-14, 220, 221, 222,
    223, 227, 235-36.

Pennsylvania Society for the Abolition of Slavery, 74, 80.

Perdido River, 119.

Perry, Commander, U.S.N., 162.

Perry, Jesse, slave-trader, 131 n.

Perry, Robert, slave-trader, 131 n.

"Perry," U.S.S., 162, 165.

Petitions, of Abolition societies, 56, 79-81, 83, 84;
  of free Negroes, 85, 86.

Pettigrew (of S.C.), 176.

Philadelphia, 162, 166.

Pinckney, Charles (of S.C.), in Federal Convention, 58-60, 65.

Pinckney, C.C. (of S.C.), in Federal Convention, 59-63, 64.

Pindall, Congressman, 122 n., 123 n.

Piracy, slave-trade made, 124-25, 140, 141, 146, 149, 155 n.

Pitkin, T. (of Conn.), 99 n., 104 n.

Pitt, William, 134.

Plumer, Wm. (of N.H.), 127.

Pollard, Edward, 176.

Pongas River, Africa, 129.

Portugal, treaties with England, 135, 137, 145 n., 150, 256;
  slaves in colonies, 46, 133;
  abolition of slave-trade by, 136, 144 n.;
  use of flag of, 144.

Presidents. See under individual names.

Price of slaves, 163.

Prince George County, Va., 49.

Privy Council, report to, 134.

Proffit, U.S. Minister to Brazil, 164.

Prohibition of slave-trade by Ga., 15, 75;
  S.C., 17, 89;
  N.C., 19;
  Va., 20;
  Md., 22;
  N.Y., 26;
  Vermont, 28;
  Penn., 28, 29;
  Del., 31;
  N.J., 32;
  N.H., 36;
  Mass., 37;
  R.I., 40;
  Conn., 43;
  United States, 110;
  England, 135;
  Confederate States, 188.
  See also Appendices.

Providence, R.I., 42.

Prussia at European Congresses, 135-36, 139, 147, 281.

Pryor, R.A. (of Va.), 171.


QUAKERS. See Friends.

Quarantine of slaves, 16.

Quebec, 52.

Quincy, Josiah, Congressman, 100 n., 102 n.

Quintuple Treaty, 145, 147, 281.


RABUN, Wm., Governor of Ga., 127.

Ramsey, David (of S.C.), 69.

Randolph, Edmund, in the Federal Convention, 58, 59, 63.

Randolph, John, Congressman, 106-07.

Randolph, Thomas M., Congressman, 108.

Registration of slaves, 16, 132 n., 258, 260.

Revenue from slave-trade, 87, 90, 95, 111, 112.
  See Duty Acts.

Rhode Island, slave-trade in, 34, 35, 85;
  restrictions in, 40-43;
  "Association" in, 48;
  reception of Constitution by, 72;
  abolition societies in, 42, 74, 83;
  Colonial and State legislation, 200, 203, 213, 214, 222, 223, 224-25,
    227-30, 233.

Rice Crop, 17, 20.

Right of Search, 137-42, 145 n., 148-51, 156, 183, 185, 191, 256, 295.

Rio Grande river, 176.

Rio Janeiro, Brazil, 145, 160, 162.

Rolfe, John, 25.

Royal Adventurers, Company of, 10.

Royal African Company, 10-11.

Rum, traffic in, 35, 36, 50.

Rush, Richard, Minister to England, 138.

Russell, Lord John, 150, 297, 303.

Russia in European Congresses, 135, 139, 147;
signs Quintuple Treaty, 147, 281.

Rutledge, Edward, in Federal Convention, 58-61, 65.

Rutledge, John, Congressman, 84-87.


ST. AUGUSTINE, 114.

St. Johns, Island of, 52.

St. Johns Parish, Ga., 52.

St. Mary's River, Fla., 113-14, 116, 117.

"Sanderson," slaver, 35 n.

Sandiford, 29.

San Domingo, trade with, stopped, 50, 96;
  insurrection in, 74, 84, 86, 96;
  deputies from, 133.

Sardinia, 142.

Savannah, Ga., 16, 51, 169.

Search. See Right of Search.

Sewall, Wm., slave-trader, 131 n.

Seward, Wm. H., Secretary, 151, 289, 293.

Seward (of Ga.), Congressman, 175.

Sharpe, Granville, 134.

Sherbro Islands, Africa, 158.

Sherman, Roger, in the Federal Convention, 59, 60, 62, 65;
  in Congress, 78.

Shields, Thomas, slave-trader, 131 n.

Sierra Leone, 129, 151, 191.

Sinnickson (of N.J.), Congressman, 81.

Slave Power, the, 153, 198.

Slavers:
  "Alexander," 129 n.;
  "Amedie," 138 n.;
  "L'Amistad," 143;
  "Antelope" ("Ramirez"), 132;
  "Comet," 143 n.;
  "Constitution," 120, 121;
  "Creole," 143;
  "Daphne," 129 n.;
  "Dorset," 115;
  "Eliza," 129 n.;
  "Emily," 185;
  "Encomium," 143 n.;
  "Endymion," 129 n.;
  "Esperanza," 129 n.;
  "Eugene," 115, 129 n.;
  "Fame," 162;
  "Fortuna," 138 n.;
  "Illinois," 149;
  "Le Louis," 138 n.;
  "Louisa," 120;
  "Marino," 120;
  "Martha," 165;
  "Mary," 131 n.;
  "Mathilde," 129 n.;
  "Paz," 115;
  "La PensÃ©e," 129 n.;
  "Plattsburg," 128 n., 129 n.;
  "Prova," 165;
  "Ramirez" ("Antelope"), 129 n., 130;
  "Rebecca," 115;
  "Rosa," 115;
  "Sanderson," 35 n.;
  "San Juan Nepomuceno," 138 n.;
  "Saucy Jack," 115;
  "Science," 129 n.;
  "Wanderer," 180, 184, 186;
  "Wildfire," 190 n.;
  see also Appendix C.

Slavery. See Table of Contents.

Slaves, number imported, 11, 13, 23 n., 27 n., 31 n., 33 n., 36 n.,
    39 n., 40 n., 43 n., 44 n., 89, 94, 181;
  insurrections of, 13, 18, 30, 204;
  punishments of, 13;
  captured on high seas, 39, 56, 186;
  illegal traffic in, 88, 95, 112-21, 126-32, 165, 166, 179;
  abducted, 144.

Slave-trade, see Table of Contents;
  internal, 9, 155;
  coastwise, 98, 106-09, 156, 161, 183, 191, 302.

Slave-traders, 10, 11, 25, 34, 35, 37, 41, 93, 113, 119, 126-29, 146,
    161, 176, 178, 180, 184;
  prosecution and conviction of, 119, 120, 121, 126, 127, 130, 161, 162,
    183, 190, 191;
  Pardon of, 131;
  punishment of, 37, 104, 122, 127, 132, 190, 191, 199, 261, 264, 268,
    274, 296.
  For ships, see under Slavers, and Appendix C.

Slidell, John, 182.

Sloan (of N.J.), Congressman, 99 n., 100, 105 n., 111, 251, 252.

Smilie, John (of Pa.), Congressman, 99 n., 105 n., 104 n.

Smith, Caleb B., 190.

Smith, J.F., slave-trader, 131 n.

Smith (of S.C.), Senator, 78-81, 93.

Smith, Capt., slave-trader, 37.

Smuggling of slaves, 76, 108, 109, 114, 116, 117, 127, 128, 129, 130,
    166, 179-82.

Sneed (of Tenn.), Congressman, 170.

SoulÃ©, Pierre, 177.

South Carolina, slavery in, 13, 14, 17, 18, 93;
  restrictions in, 16-19, 75;
  attitude toward slave-trade, 49, 52, 55, 57, 81, 84;
  in the Federal Convention, 59-67, 70, 72;
  illicit traffic to, 89;
  repeal of prohibition, 89, 90, 92, 95;
  movement to reopen slave-trade, 169, 171, 172 n., 173;
  Colonial and State statutes, 201, 208-13, 215, 218, 220, 222, 229, 232,
    237-38, 241-43, 245-47, 289-91.

Southeby, Wm., 29.

Southern Colonies, 15, 23.
  See under individual Colonies.

Spaight, in Federal Convention, 65.

Spain, signs Assiento, 11;
  colonial slave-trade of, 10;
  colonial slavery, 133;
  war with Dutch, 25;
  abolishes slave-trade, 136, 137, 145 n.;
  L'Amistad case with, 143;
  flag of, in slave-trade, 113, 114, 115, 144, 150, 159;
  treaties, 206, 208, 257.

Spottswood, Governor of Virginia, 20.

Spratt, L.W. (of S.C.), 171, 172, 190 n.

Stanton (of R.I.), Congressman, 89 n., 106.

States. See under individual States.

Statutes, Colonial, see under names of individual Colonies;
  State, 56-57, 75-77;
    see under names of individual States, and Appendices A and B;
  United States, Act of 1794, 83, 242;
    Act of 1800, 85, 245;
    Act of 1803, 87, 246;
    Act of 1807, 97, 253;
    Act of 1818, 121, 258;
    Act of 1819, 123, 259;
    Act of 1820, 124, 261;
    Act of 1860, 187, 297;
    Act of 1862, 191, 302;
    see also Appendix B, 247, 248, 254, 264, 272, 273, 276, 277, 285,
      286, 289, 291, 294, 300, 303, 304.

Stephens, Alexander, 175.

Stevenson, A., Minister to England, 146-47.

Stone (of Md.), Congressman, 79, 81, 108.

Stono, S.C., insurrection at, 18.

Sumner, Charles, 192 n., 305.

Sweden, 135, 142, 269;
  Delaware Colony, 31;
  slaves in Colonies, 133.

Sylvester (of N.Y.), Congressman, 81.


TAYLOR, Zachary, 286.

Texas, 116, 144 n., 150, 155, 156, 165, 176, 180, 273, 277-78.

Treaties, 11, 135-37, 141, 142, 145, 147-50, 151, 159, 206, 207, 228,
    252, 254, 256, 259, 265, 269, 275, 276, 281, 285, 288, 292, 301-05.

Trist, N., 160 n., 164, 165 n.

Tyler, John, 148, 285, 286.


UNDERWOOD, John C., 181.

United States, 55, 74, 77, 84, 87, 88, 89, 90, 92, 97, 98, 102, 103, 110,
    114, 117, 119, 120, 122, 126, 127, 128, 129, 133, 138, 136-51, 153,
    156, 157, 158, 162-67, 168, 178, 179, 185, 188, 190, 242, 245-48, 264,
    272-76, 277, 285, 286, 289, 291, 294, 297, 300-04.
  See also Table of Contents.

Up de Graeff, Derick, 28.

Up den Graef, Abraham, 28.

Uruguay, 144 n.

Utrecht, Treaty of, 207.


VAN BUREN, Martin, 79-80.

Van Rensselaer, Congressman, 108.

Varnum, J., Congressman, 105 n.

Venezuela, 144 n.

Vermont, 28, 57, 94, 226, 228, 232, 249.

Verona, Congress of, 139.

Vicksburg, Miss., 172, 181.

Vienna, Congress of, 135.

Virginia, first slaves imported, 28, 306;
  slavery in, 14;
  restrictions in, 19-22, 76;
  frame of government of, 21;
  "Association" in, 48, 52, 57;
  in the Federal Convention, 61, 62, 64, 71;
  abolition sentiment in, 74, 78, 83;
  attitude on reopening the slave-trade, 171, 173 n.;
  Colonial and State statutes, 201-04, 213-15, 219-20, 222, 226, 227,
    240, 249.


WALLACE, L.R., slave-trader, 131 n.

Waln (of Penn.), Congressman, 85.

"Wanderer," case of the slaver, 180, 184.

Washington, Treaty of (1842), 148-50, 170, 172, 182, 185, 285, 286,
    288, 292.

Watt, James, 152 n.

Webster, Daniel, 147, 281.

Webster, Noah, 68.

Wentworth, Governor of N.H., 36.

West Indies, slave-trade to and from, 10, 13, 17, 25, 35, 37, 41, 42,
    46, 48, 50, 55, 114, 117, 141, 151, 275;
  slavery in, 13, 168, 193;
  restrictions on importation of slaves from, 26, 75, 76, 87;
  revolution in, 74-77, 84-88, 96-97;
  mixed court in, 151 n., 191.

Western territory, 81, 261.

Whitney, Eli, 153.

Whydah, Africa, 149.

Wilberforce, Wm., 134.

Wilde, R.H., 132.

"Wildfire," slaver, 190 n., 315.

"William," case of the slaver, 315.

Williams, D.R. (of N.C.), Congressman, 102 n., 109 n., 111.

Williamsburg district, S.C., 169.

Williamson (of S.C.), in Federal Convention, 59, 63, 65.

Wilmington, N.C., 88.

Wilson, James, in Federal Convention, 56, 58, 62, 70.

Wilson (of Mass.), Congressman, 295, 296, 298.

Winn, African agent, 158.

Winston, Zenas, slave-trader, 131 n.

Wirt, William, 118, 126 n., 130.

Woolman, John, 29.

Wright (of Va.), 126.


YANCEY, W.L., 171.
, and
these crooked marks on a fragile leaf be not indeed

The Negro

CONTENTS

     Preface
   I Africa
  II The Coming of Black Men
 III Ethiopia and Egypt
  IV The Niger and Islam
   V Guinea and Congo
  VI The Great Lakes and Zymbabwe
 VII The War of Races at Land's End
VIII African Culture
  IX The Trade in Men
   X The West Indies and Latin America
  XI The Negro in the United States
 XII The Negro Problems
     Suggestions for Further Reading


MAPS

The Physical Geography of Africa
Ancient Kingdoms of Africa
Races in Africa
Distribution of Negro Blood, Ancient and Modern




THE NEGRO




TO
A FAITHFUL HELPER
M.G.A.




PREFACE


The time has not yet come for a complete history of the Negro
peoples. ArchÃ¦ological research in Africa has just begun, and many
sources of information in Arabian, Portuguese, and other tongues are
not fully at our command; and, too, it must frankly be confessed,
racial prejudice against darker peoples is still too strong in so-called
civilized centers for judicial appraisement of the peoples of Africa.
Much intensive monographic work in history and science is needed
to clear mooted points and quiet the controversialist who mistakes
present personal desire for scientific proof.

Nevertheless, I have not been able to withstand the temptation to
essay such short general statement of the main known facts and their
fair interpretation as shall enable the general reader to know as men
a sixth or more of the human race. Manifestly so short a story must
be mainly conclusions and generalizations with but meager indication
of authorities and underlying arguments. Possibly, if the Public
will, a later and larger book may be more satisfactory on these points.

W.E. BURGHARDT DU BOIS.

New York City, Feb. 1, 1915.




[Illustration: The Physical Geography of Africa]




I AFRICA

                "Behold!
The Sphinx is Africa. The bond
Of Silence is upon her. Old
And white with tombs, and rent and shorn;
With raiment wet with tears and torn,
And trampled on, yet all untamed."

MILLER


Africa is at once the most romantic and the most tragic of continents. Its
very names reveal its mystery and wide-reaching influence. It is the
"Ethiopia" of the Greek, the "Kush" and "Punt" of the Egyptian, and the
Arabian "Land of the Blacks." To modern Europe it is the "Dark Continent"
and "Land of Contrasts"; in literature it is the seat of the Sphinx and
the lotus eaters, the home of the dwarfs, gnomes, and pixies, and the
refuge of the gods; in commerce it is the slave mart and the source of
ivory, ebony, rubber, gold, and diamonds. What other continent can rival
in interest this Ancient of Days?

There are those, nevertheless, who would write universal history and leave
out Africa. But how, asks Ratzel, can one leave out the land of Egypt and
Carthage? and Frobenius declares that in future Africa must more and more
be regarded as an integral part of the great movement of world history.
Yet it is true that the history of Africa is unusual, and its strangeness
is due in no small degree to the physical peculiarities of the continent.
With three times the area of Europe it has a coast line a fifth shorter.
Like Europe it is a peninsula of Asia, curving southwestward around the
Indian Sea. It has few gulfs, bays, capes, or islands. Even the rivers,
though large and long, are not means of communication with the outer
world, because from the central high plateau they plunge in rapids and
cataracts to the narrow coastlands and the sea.

The general physical contour of Africa has been likened to an inverted
plate with one or more rows of mountains at the edge and a low coastal
belt. In the south the central plateau is three thousand or more feet
above the sea, while in the north it is a little over one thousand feet.
Thus two main divisions of the continent are easily distinguished: the
broad northern rectangle, reaching down as far as the Gulf of Guinea and
Cape Guardafui, with seven million square miles; and the peninsula which
tapers toward the south, with five million square miles.

Four great rivers and many lesser streams water the continent. The
greatest is the Congo in the center, with its vast curving and endless
estuaries; then the Nile, draining the cluster of the Great Lakes and
flowing northward "like some grave, mighty thought, threading a dream";
the Niger in the northwest, watering the Sudan below the Sahara; and,
finally, the Zambesi, with its greater Niagara in the southeast. Even
these waters leave room for deserts both south and north, but the greater
ones are the three million square miles of sand wastes in the north.

More than any other land, Africa lies in the tropics, with a warm, dry
climate, save in the central Congo region, where rain at all seasons
brings tropical luxuriance. The flora is rich but not wide in variety,
including the gum acacia, ebony, several dye woods, the kola nut, and
probably tobacco and millet. To these many plants have been added in
historic times. The fauna is rich in mammals, and here, too, many from
other continents have been widely introduced and used.

Primarily Africa is the Land of the Blacks. The world has always been
familiar with black men, who represent one of the most ancient of human
stocks. Of the ancient world gathered about the Mediterranean, they formed
a part and were viewed with no surprise or dislike, because this world saw
them come and go and play their part with other men. Was Clitus the
brother-in-law of Alexander the Great less to be honored because he
happened to be black? Was Terence less famous? The medieval European
world, developing under the favorable physical conditions of the north
temperate zone, knew the black man chiefly as a legend or occasional
curiosity, but still as a fellow man--an Othello or a Prester John or an
Antar.

The modern world, in contrast, knows the Negro chiefly as a bond slave in
the West Indies and America. Add to this the fact that the darker races in
other parts of the world have, in the last four centuries, lagged behind
the flying and even feverish footsteps of Europe, and we face to-day a
widespread assumption throughout the dominant world that color is a mark
of inferiority.

The result is that in writing of this, one of the most ancient,
persistent, and widespread stocks of mankind, one faces astounding
prejudice. That which may be assumed as true of white men must be proven
beyond peradventure if it relates to Negroes. One who writes of the
development of the Negro race must continually insist that he is writing
of a normal human stock, and that whatever it is fair to predicate of the
mass of human beings may be predicated of the Negro. It is the silent
refusal to do this which has led to so much false writing on Africa and
of its inhabitants. Take, for instance, the answer to the apparently
simple question "What is a Negro?" We find the most extraordinary
confusion of thought and difference of opinion. There is a certain type in
the minds of most people which, as David Livingstone said, can be found
only in caricature and not in real life. When scientists have tried to
find an extreme type of black, ugly, and woolly-haired Negro, they have
been compelled more and more to limit his home even in Africa. At least
nine-tenths of the African people do not at all conform to this type, and
the typical Negro, after being denied a dwelling place in the Sudan, along
the Nile, in East Central Africa, and in South Africa, was finally given a
very small country between the Senegal and the Niger, and even there was
found to give trace of many stocks. As Winwood Reade says, "The typical
Negro is a rare variety even among Negroes."

As a matter of fact we cannot take such extreme and largely fanciful stock
as typifying that which we may fairly call the Negro race. In the case of
no other race is so narrow a definition attempted. A "white" man may be of
any color, size, or facial conformation and have endless variety of
cranial measurement and physical characteristics. A "yellow" man is
perhaps an even vaguer conception.

In fact it is generally recognized to-day that no scientific definition of
race is possible. Differences, and striking differences, there are between
men and groups of men, but they fade into each other so insensibly that we
can only indicate the main divisions of men in broad outlines. As Von
Luschan says, "The question of the number of human races has quite lost
its _raison d'Ãªtre_ and has become a subject rather of philosophic
speculation than of scientific research. It is of no more importance now
to know how many human races there are than to know how many angels can
dance on the point of a needle. Our aim now is to find out how ancient and
primitive races developed from others and how races changed or evolved
through migration and inter-breeding."[1]

The mulatto (using the term loosely to indicate either an intermediate
type between white and black or a mingling of the two) is as typically
African as the black man and cannot logically be included in the "white"
race, especially when American usage includes the mulatto in the Negro
race.

It is reasonable, according to fact and historic usage, to include under
the word "Negro" the darker peoples of Africa characterized by a brown
skin, curled or "frizzled" hair, full and sometimes everted lips, a
tendency to a development of the maxillary parts of the face, and a
dolichocephalic head. This type is not fixed or definite. The color varies
widely; it is never black or bluish, as some say, and it becomes often
light brown or yellow. The hair varies from curly to a wool-like mass, and
the facial angle and cranial form show wide variation.

It is as impossible in Africa as elsewhere to fix with any certainty the
limits of racial variation due to climate and the variation due to
intermingling. In the past, when scientists assumed one unvarying Negro
type, every variation from that type was interpreted as meaning mixture of
blood. To-day we recognize a broader normal African type which, as
Palgrave says, may best be studied "among the statues of the Egyptian
rooms of the British Museum; the larger gentle eye, the full but not
over-protruding lips, the rounded contour, and the good-natured, easy,
sensuous expression. This is the genuine African model." To this race
Africa in the main and parts of Asia have belonged since prehistoric
times.

The color of this variety of man, as the color of other varieties, is due
to climate. Conditions of heat, cold, and moisture, working for thousands
of years through the skin and other organs, have given men their
differences of color. This color pigment is a protection against sunlight
and consequently varies with the intensity of the sunlight. Thus in Africa
we find the blackest men in the fierce sunlight of the desert, red pygmies
in the forest, and yellow Bushmen on the cooler southern plateau.

Next to the color, the hair is the most distinguishing characteristic of
the Negro, but the two characteristics do not vary with each other. Some
of the blackest of the Negroes have curly rather than woolly hair, while
the crispest, most closely curled hair is found among the yellow
Hottentots and Bushmen. The difference between the hair of the lighter and
darker races is a difference of degree, not of kind, and can be easily
measured. If the hair follicles of a China-man, a European, and a Negro
are cut across transversely, it will be found that the diameter of the
first is 100 by 77 to 85, the second 100 by 62 to 72, while that of the
Negro is 100 by 40 to 60. This elliptical form of the Negro's hair causes
it to curl more or less tightly.

There have been repeated efforts to discover, by measurements of various
kinds, further and more decisive differences which would serve as really
scientific determinants of race. Gradually these efforts have been given
up. To-day we realize that there are no hard and fast racial types among
men. Race is a dynamic and not a static conception, and the typical races
are continually changing and developing, amalgamating and differentiating.
In this little book, then, we are studying the history of the darker part
of the human family, which is separated from the rest of mankind by no
absolute physical line, but which nevertheless forms, as a mass, a social
group distinct in history, appearance, and to some extent in spiritual
gift.

We cannot study Africa without, however, noting some of the other races
concerned in its history, particularly the Asiatic Semites. The
intercourse of Africa with Arabia and other parts of Asia has been so
close and long-continued that it is impossible to-day to disentangle the
blood relationships. Negro blood certainly appears in strong strain among
the Semites, and the obvious mulatto groups in Africa, arising from
ancient and modern mingling of Semite and Negro, has given rise to the
term "Hamite," under cover of which millions of Negroids have been
characteristically transferred to the "white" race by some eager
scientists.

The earliest Semites came to Africa across the Red Sea. The Phoenicians
came along the northern coasts a thousand years before Christ and began
settlements which culminated in Carthage and extended down the Atlantic
shores of North Africa nearly to the Gulf of Guinea.

From the earliest times the Greeks have been in contact with Africa as
visitors, traders, and colonists, and the Persian influence came with
Cambyses and others. Roman Africa was bounded by the desert, but at times
came into contact with the blacks across the Sahara and in the valley of
the Nile. After the breaking up of the Roman Empire the Greek and Latin
Christians filtered through Africa, followed finally by a Germanic
invasion in 429 A.D.

In the seventh century the All-Mother, Asia, claimed Africa again for her
own and blew a cloud of Semitic Mohammedanism all across North Africa,
veiling the dark continent from Europe for a thousand years and converting
vast masses of the blacks to Islam. The Portuguese began to raise the veil
in the fifteenth century, sailing down the Atlantic coast and initiating
the modern slave trade. The Spanish, French, Dutch, and English followed
them, but as traders in men rather than explorers.

The Portuguese explored the coasts of the Gulf of Guinea, visiting the
interior kingdoms, and then passing by the mouth of the Congo proceeded
southward. Eventually they rounded the Cape of Good Hope and pursued their
explorations as far as the mountains of Abyssinia. This began the modern
exploration of Africa, which is a curious fairy tale, and recalls to us
the great names of Livingstone, Burton, Speke, Stanley, Barth,
Schweinfurth, and many others. In this way Africa has been made known to
the modern world.

The difficulty of this modern lifting of the veil of centuries emphasizes
two physical facts that underlie all African history: the peculiar
inaccessibility of the continent to peoples from without, which made it so
easily possible for the great human drama played here to hide itself from
the ears of other worlds; and, on the other hand, the absence of interior
barriers--the great stretch of that central plateau which placed
practically every budding center of culture at the mercy of barbarism,
sweeping a thousand miles, with no Alps or Himalayas or Appalachians to
hinder.

With this peculiarly uninviting coast line and the difficulties in
interior segregation must be considered the climate of Africa. While there
is much diversity and many salubrious tracts along with vast barren
wastes, yet, as Sir Harry Johnston well remarks, "Africa is the chief
stronghold of the real Devil--the reactionary forces of Nature hostile to
the uprise of Humanity. Here Beelzebub, King of the Flies, marshals his
vermiform and arthropod hosts--insects, ticks, and nematode worms--which
more than in other continents (excepting Negroid Asia) convey to the skin,
veins, intestines, and spinal marrow of men and other vertebrates the
microorganisms which cause deadly, disfiguring, or debilitating diseases,
or themselves create the morbid condition of the persecuted human being,
beasts, bird, reptile, frog, or fish."[2] The inhabitants of this land
have had a sheer fight for physical survival comparable with that in no
other great continent, and this must not be forgotten when we consider
their history.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Von Luschan: in _Inter-Racial Problems_, p. 16.

[2] Johnston: _Negro in the New World_, pp. 14-15.




II THE COMING OF BLACK MEN


The movements of prehistoric man can be seen as yet but dimly in the
uncertain mists of time. This is the story that to-day seems most
probable: from some center in southern Asia primitive human beings began
to differentiate in two directions. Toward the south appeared the
primitive Negro, long-headed and with flattened hair follicle. He spread
along southern Asia and passed over into Africa, where he survives to-day
as the reddish dwarfs of the center and the Bushmen of South Africa.

Northward and eastward primitive man became broader headed and
straight-haired and spread over eastern Asia, forming the Mongolian type.
Either through the intermingling of these two types or, as some prefer to
think, by the direct prolongation of the original primitive man, a third
intermediate type of human being appeared with hair and cranial
measurement intermediate between the primitive Negro and Mongolian. All
these three types of men intermingled their blood freely and developed
variations according to climate and environment.

Other and older theories and legends of the origin and spread of mankind
are of interest now only because so many human beings have believed them
in the past. The biblical story of Shem, Ham, and Japheth retains the
interest of a primitive myth with its measure of allegorical truth,[3] but
has, of course, no historic basis.

The older "Aryan" theory assumed the migration into Europe of one dominant
Asiatic race of civilized conquerors, to whose blood and influence all
modern culture was due. To this "white" race Semitic Asia, a large part of
black Africa, and all Europe was supposed to belong. This "Aryan" theory
has been practically abandoned in the light of recent research, and it
seems probable now that from the primitive Negroid stock evolved in Asia
the Semites either by local variation or intermingling with other stocks;
later there developed the Mediterranean race, with Negroid
characteristics, and the modern Negroes. The blue-eyed, light-haired
Germanic people may have arisen as a modern variation of the mixed peoples
produced by the mingling of Asiatic and African elements. The last word on
this development has not yet been said, and there is still much to learn
and explain; but it is certainly proved to-day beyond doubt that the
so-called Hamites of Africa, the brown and black curly and frizzly-haired
inhabitants of North and East Africa, are not "white" men if we draw the
line between white and black in any logical way.

The primitive Negroid race of men developed in Asia wandered eastward as
well as westward. They entered on the one hand Burmah and the South Sea
Islands, and on the other hand they came through Mesopotamia and gave
curly hair and a Negroid type to Jew, Syrian, and Assyrian. Ancient
statues of Indian divinities show the Negro type with black face and
close-curled hair, and early Babylonian culture was Negroid. In Arabia the
Negroes may have divided, and one stream perhaps wandered into Europe by
way of Syria. Traces of these Negroes are manifest not only in skeletons,
but in the brunette type of all South Europe. The other branch proceeded
to Egypt and tropical Africa. Another, but perhaps less probable, theory
is that ancient Negroes may have entered Africa from Europe, since the
most ancient skulls of Algeria are Negroid.

The primitive African was not an extreme type. One may judge from modern
pygmy and Bushmen that his color was reddish or yellow, and his skull was
sometimes round like the Mongolian. He entered Africa not less than fifty
thousand years ago and settled eventually in the broad region between Lake
Chad and the Great Lakes and remained there long stretches of years.

After a lapse of perhaps thirty thousand years there entered Africa a
further migration of Asiatic people, Negroid in many characteristics, but
lighter and straighter haired than the primitive Negroes. From this
Mediterranean race was developed the modern inhabitants of the shores of
the Mediterranean in Europe, Asia, and Africa and, by mingling with the
primitive Negroes, the ancient Egyptians and modern Negroid races of
Africa.

As we near historic times the migrations of men became more frequent from
Asia and from Europe, and in Africa came movements and minglings which
give to the whole of Africa a distinct mulatto character. The primitive
Negro stock was "mulatto" in the sense of being not widely differentiated
from the dark, original Australoid stock. As the earlier yellow Negro
developed in the African tropics to the bigger, blacker type, he was
continually mingling his blood with similar types developed in temperate
climes to sallower color and straighter hair.

We find therefore, in Africa to-day, every degree of development in
Negroid stocks and every degree of intermingling of these developments,
both among African peoples and between Africans, Europeans, and Asiatics.
The mistake is continually made of considering these types as transitions
between absolute Caucasians and absolute Negroes. No such absolute type
ever existed on either side. Both were slowly differentiated from a common
ancestry and continually remingled their blood while the differentiating
was progressing. From prehistoric times down to to-day Africa is, in this
sense, primarily the land of the mulatto. So, too, was earlier Europe and
Asia; only in these countries the mulatto was early bleached by the
climate, while in Africa he was darkened.

It is not easy to summarize the history of these dark African peoples,
because so little is known and so much is still in dispute. Yet, by
avoiding the real controversies and being unafraid of mere questions of
definition, we may trace a great human movement with considerable
definiteness.

Three main Negro types early made their appearance: the lighter and
smaller primitive stock; the larger forest Negro in the center and on the
west coast, and the tall, black Nilotic Negro in the eastern Sudan. In the
earliest times we find the Negroes in the valley of the Nile, pressing
downward from the interior. Here they mingled with Semitic types, and
after a lapse of millenniums there arose from this mingling the culture of
Ethiopia and Egypt, probably the first of higher human cultures.

To the west of the Nile the Negroes expanded straight across the continent
to the Atlantic. Centers of higher culture appeared very early along the
Gulf of Guinea and curling backward met Egyptian, Ethiopian, and even
European and Asiatic influences about Lake Chad. To the southeast, nearer
the primitive seats of the earliest African immigrants and open to
Egyptian and East Indian influences, the Negro culture which culminated at
Zymbabwe arose, and one may trace throughout South Africa its wide
ramifications.

All these movements gradually aroused the central tribes to unrest. They
beat against the barriers north, northeast, and west, but gradually
settled into a great southeastward migration. Calling themselves proudly
La Bantu (The People), they grew by agglomeration into a warlike nation,
speaking one language. They eventually conquered all Africa south of the
Gulf of Guinea and spread their influence to the northward.

While these great movements were slowly transforming Africa, she was also
receiving influences from beyond her shores and sending influences out.
With mulatto Egypt black Africa was always in closest touch, so much so
that to some all evidence of Negro uplift seem Egyptian in origin. The
truth is, rather, that Egypt was herself always palpably Negroid, and from
her vantage ground as almost the only African gateway received and
transmitted Negro ideals.

Phoenician, Greek, and Roman came into touch more or less with black
Africa. Carthage, that North African city of a million men, had a large
caravan trade with Negroland in ivory, metals, cloth, precious stones, and
slaves. Black men served in the Carthaginian armies and marched with
Hannibal on Rome. In some of the North African kingdoms the infiltration
of Negro blood was very large and kings like Massinissa and Jugurtha were
Negroid. By way of the Atlantic the Carthaginians reached the African west
coast. Greek and Roman influences came through the desert, and the
Byzantine Empire and Persia came into communication with Negroland by way
of the valley of the Nile. The influence of these trade routes, added to
those of Egypt, Ethiopia, Benin, and Yoruba, stimulated centers of culture
in the central and western Sudan, and European and African trade early
reached large volume.

Negro soldiers were used largely in the armies that enabled the
Mohammedans to conquer North Africa and Spain. Beginning in the tenth
century and slowly creeping across the desert into Negroland, the new
religion found an already existent culture and came, not a conqueror, but
as an adapter and inspirer. Civilization received new impetus and a wave
of Mohammedanism swept eastward, erecting the great kingdoms of Melle, the
Songhay, Bornu, and the Hausa states. The older Negro culture was not
overthrown, but, like a great wedge, pushed upward and inward from Yoruba,
and gave stubborn battle to the newer culture for seven or eight
centuries.

Then it was, in the fifteenth century, that the heart disease of Africa
developed in its most virulent form. There is a modern theory that black
men are and always have been naturally slaves. Nothing is further from the
truth. In the ancient world Africa was no more a slave hunting ground than
Europe or Asia, and both Greece and Rome had much larger numbers of white
slaves than of black. It was natural that a stream of black slaves should
have poured into Egypt, because the chief line of Egyptian conquest and
defense lay toward the heart of Africa. Moreover, the Egyptians,
themselves of Negro descent, had not only Negro slaves but Negroes among
their highest nobility and even among their Pharaohs. Mohammedan
conquerors enslaved peoples of all colors in Europe, Asia, and Africa, but
eventually their empire centered in Asia and Africa and their slaves came
principally from these countries. Asia submitted to Islam except in the
Far East, which was self-protecting. Negro Africa submitted only
partially, and the remaining heathen were in small states which could not
effectively protect themselves against the Mohammedan slave trade. In this
wise the slave trade gradually began to center in Africa, for religious
and political rather than for racial reasons.

The typical African culture was the culture of family, town, and small
tribe. Hence domestic slavery easily developed a slave trade through war
and commerce. Only the integrating force of state building could have
stopped this slave trade. Was this failure to develop the great state a
racial characteristic? This does not seem a fair conclusion. In four great
centers state building began in Africa. In Ethiopia several large states
were built up, but they tottered before the onslaughts of Egypt, Persia,
Rome, and Byzantium, on the one hand, and finally fell before the
turbulent Bantu warriors from the interior. The second attempt at empire
building began in the southeast, but the same Bantu hordes, pressing now
slowly, now fiercely, from the congested center of the continent,
gradually overthrew this state and erected on its ruins a series of
smaller and more transient kingdoms.

The third attempt at state building arose on the Guinea coast in Benin and
Yoruba. It never got much beyond a federation of large industrial cities.
Its expansion toward the Congo valley was probably a prime cause of the
original Bantu movements to the southeast. Toward the north and northeast,
on the other hand, these city-states met the Sudanese armed with the new
imperial Mohammedan idea. Just as Latin Rome gave the imperial idea to the
Nordic races, so Islam brought this idea to the Sudan.

In the consequent attempts at imperialism in the western Sudan there
arose the largest of the African empires. Two circumstances, however,
militated against this empire building: first, the fierce resistance of
the heathen south made war continuous and slaves one of the articles of
systematic commerce. Secondly, the highways of legitimate African commerce
had for millenniums lain to the north. These were suddenly closed by the
Moors in the sixteenth century, and the Negro empires were thrown into the
turmoil of internal war.

It was then that the European slave traders came from the southwest. They
found partially disrupted Negro states on the west coast and falling
empires in the Sudan, together with the old unrest of over-population and
migration in the valley of the Congo. They not only offered a demand for
the usual slave trade, but they increased it to an enormous degree, until
their demand, added to the demand of the Mohammedan in Africa and Asia,
made human beings the highest priced article of commerce in Africa. Under
such circumstances there could be but one end: the virtual uprooting of
ancient African culture, leaving only misty reminders of the ruin in the
customs and work of the people. To complete this disaster came the
partition of the continent among European nations and the modern attempt
to exploit the country and the natives for the economic benefit of the
white world, together with the transplanting of black nations to the new
western world and their rise and self-assertion there.

FOOTNOTES:

[3] Ham is probably the Egyptian word "Khem" (black), the native name of
Egypt. In the original myth Canaan and not Ham was Noah's third son.

The biblical story of the "curse of Canaan" (Genesis IX, 24-25) has been
the basis of an astonishing literature which has to-day only a
psychological interest. It is sufficient to remember that for several
centuries leaders of the Christian Church gravely defended Negro slavery
and oppression as the rightful curse of God upon the descendants of a son
who had been disrespectful to his drunken father! Cf. Bishop Hopkins:
_Bible Views of Slavery_, p. 7.




III ETHIOPIA AND EGYPT


Having viewed now the land and movements of African people in main
outline, let us scan more narrowly the history of five main centers of
activity and culture, namely: the valleys of the Nile and of the Congo,
the borders of the great Gulf of Guinea, the Sudan, and South Africa.
These divisions do not cover all of Negro Africa, but they take in the
main areas and the main lines in development.

First, we turn to the valley of the Nile, perhaps the most ancient of
known seats of civilization in the world, and certainly the oldest in
Africa, with a culture reaching back six or eight thousand years. Like all
civilizations it drew largely from without and undoubtedly arose in the
valley of the Nile, because that valley was so easily made a center for
the meeting of men of all types and from all parts of the world. At the
same time Egyptian civilization seems to have been African in its
beginnings and in its main line of development, despite strong influences
from all parts of Asia. Of what race, then, were the Egyptians? They
certainly were not white in any sense of the modern use of that
word--neither in color nor physical measurement, in hair nor countenance,
in language nor social customs. They stood in relationship nearest the
Negro race in earliest times, and then gradually through the infiltration
of Mediterranean and Semitic elements became what would be described in
America as a light mulatto stock of Octoroons or Quadroons. This stock was
varied continually; now by new infiltration of Negro blood from the south,
now by Negroid and Semitic blood from the east, now by Berber types from
the north and west.

Egyptian monuments show distinctly Negro and mulatto faces. Herodotus, in
an incontrovertible passage, alludes to the Egyptians as "black and
curly-haired"[4]--a peculiarly significant statement from one used to the
brunette Mediterranean type; in another passage, concerning the fable of
the Dodonian Oracle, he again alludes to the swarthy color of the
Egyptians as exceedingly dark and even black. Ãschylus, mentioning a boat
seen from the shore, declares that its crew are Egyptians, because of
their black complexions.

Modern measurements, with all their admitted limitations, show that in the
Thebaid from one-seventh to one-third of the Egyptian population were
Negroes, and that of the predynastic Egyptians less than half could be
classed as non-Negroid. Judging from measurements in the tombs of nobles
as late as the eighteenth dynasty, Negroes form at least one-sixth of the
higher class.[5]

Such measurements are by no means conclusive, but they are apt to be
under rather than over statements of the prevalence of Negro blood. Head
measurements of Negro Americans would probably place most of them in the
category of whites. The evidence of language also connects Egypt with
Africa and the Negro race rather than with Asia, while religious
ceremonies and social customs all go to strengthen this evidence.

The ethnic history of Northeast Africa would seem, therefore, to have been
this: predynastic Egypt was settled by Negroes from Ethiopia. They were of
varied type: the broad-nosed, woolly-haired type to which the word "Negro"
is sometimes confined; the black, curly-haired, sharper featured type,
which must be considered an equally Negroid variation. These Negroes met
and mingled with the invading Mediterranean race from North Africa and
Asia. Thus the blood of the sallower race spread south and that of the
darker race north. Black priests appear in Crete three thousand years
before Christ, and Arabia is to this day thoroughly permeated with Negro
blood. Perhaps, as Chamberlain says, "one of the prime reasons why no
civilization of the type of that of the Nile arose in other parts of the
continent, if such a thing were at all possible, was that Egypt acted as a
sort of channel by which the genius of Negro-land was drafted off into the
service of Mediterranean and Asiatic culture."[6]

To one familiar with the striking and beautiful types arising from the
mingling of Negro with Latin and Germanic types in America, the puzzle of
the Egyptian type is easily solved. It was unlike any of its neighbors and
a unique type until one views the modern mulatto; then the faces of
Rahotep and Nefert, of Khafra and Amenemhat I, of Aahmes and Nefertari,
and even of the great Ramessu II, become curiously familiar.

The history of Egypt is a science in itself. Before the reign of the first
recorded king, five thousand years or more before Christ, there had
already existed in Egypt a culture and art arising by long evolution from
the days of paleolithic man, among a distinctly Negroid people. About 4777
B.C. Aha-Mena began the first of three successive Egyptian empires. This
lasted two thousand years, with many Pharaohs, like Khafra of the Fourth
Dynasty, of a strongly Negroid cast of countenance.

At the end of the period the empire fell apart into Egyptian and Ethiopian
halves, and a silence of three centuries ensued. It is quite possible that
an incursion of conquering black men from the south poured over the land
in these years and dotted Egypt in the next centuries with monuments on
which the full-blooded Negro type is strongly and triumphantly impressed.
The great Sphinx at Gizeh, so familiar to all the world, the Sphinxes of
Tanis, the statue from the Fayum, the statue of the Esquiline at Rome,
and the Colossi of Bubastis all represent black, full-blooded Negroes and
are described by Petrie as "having high cheek bones, flat cheeks, both in
one plane, a massive nose, firm projecting lips, and thick hair, with an
austere and almost savage expression of power."[7]

Blyden, the great modern black leader of West Africa, said of the Sphinx
at Gizeh: "Her features are decidedly of the African or Negro type, with
'expanded nostrils.' If, then, the Sphinx was placed here--looking out in
majestic and mysterious silence over the empty plain where once stood the
great city of Memphis in all its pride and glory, as an 'emblematic
representation of the king'--is not the inference clear as to the peculiar
type or race to which that king belonged?"[8]

The middle empire arose 3064 B.C. and lasted nearly twenty-four centuries.
Under Pharaohs whose Negro descent is plainly evident, like Amenemhat I
and III and Usertesen I, the ancient glories of Egypt were restored and
surpassed. At the same time there is strong continuous pressure from the
wild and unruly Negro tribes of the upper Nile valley, and we get some
idea of the fear which they inspired throughout Egypt when we read of the
great national rejoicing which followed the triumph of Usertesen III (c.
2660-22) over these hordes. He drove them back and attempted to confine
them to the edge of the Nubian Desert above the Second Cataract. Hemmed in
here, they set up a state about this time and founded Nepata.

Notwithstanding this repulse of black men, less than one hundred years
later a full-blooded Negro from the south, Ra Nehesi, was seated on the
throne of the Pharaohs and was called "The king's eldest son." This may
mean that an incursion from the far south had placed a black conqueror on
the throne. At any rate, the whole empire was in some way shaken, and two
hundred years later the invasion of the Hyksos began. The domination of
Hyksos kings who may have been Negroids from Asia[9] lasted for five
hundred years.

The redemption of Egypt from these barbarians came from Upper Egypt, led
by the mulatto Aahmes. He founded in 1703 B.C. the new empire, which
lasted fifteen hundred years. His queen, Nefertari, "the most venerated
figure of Egyptian history,"[10] was a Negress of great beauty, strong
personality, and of unusual administrative force. She was for many years
joint ruler with her son, Amenhotep I, who succeeded his father.[11]

The new empire was a period of foreign conquest and internal splendor and
finally of religious dispute and overthrow. Syria was conquered in these
reigns and Asiatic civilization and influences poured in upon Egypt. The
great Tahutmes III, whose reign was "one of the grandest and most eventful
in Egyptian history,"[12] had a strong Negroid countenance, as had also
Queen Hatshepsut, who sent the celebrated expedition to reopen ancient
trade with the Hottentots of Punt. A new strain of Negro blood came to the
royal line through Queen Mutemua about 1420 B.C., whose son, Amenhotep
III, built a great temple at Luqsor and the Colossi at Memnon.

The whole of the period in a sense culminated in the great Ramessu II, the
oppressor of the Hebrews, who with his Egyptian, Libyan, and Negro armies
fought half the world. His reign, however, was the beginning of decline,
and foes began to press Egypt from the white north and the black south.
The priests transferred their power at Thebes, while the Assyrians under
Nimrod overran Lower Egypt. The center of interest is now transferred to
Ethiopia, and we pass to the more shadowy history of that land.

The most perfect example of Egyptian poetry left to us is a celebration of
the prowess of Usertesen III in confining the turbulent Negro tribes to
the territory below the Second Cataract of the Nile. The Egyptians called
this territory Kush, and in the farthest confines of Kush lay Punt, the
cradle of their race. To the ancient Mediterranean world Ethiopia (i.e.,
the Land of the Black-faced) was a region of gods and fairies. Zeus and
Poseidon feasted each year among the "blameless Ethiopians," and Black
Memnon, King of Ethiopia, was one of the greatest of heroes.

"The Ethiopians conceive themselves," says Diodorus Siculus (Lib. III),
"to be of greater antiquity than any other nation; and it is probable
that, born under the sun's path, its warmth may have ripened them earlier
than other men. They suppose themselves also to be the inventors of divine
worship, of festivals, of solemn assemblies, of sacrifices, and every
religious practice. They affirm that the Egyptians are one of their
colonies."

The Egyptians themselves, in later days, affirmed that they and their
civilization came from the south and from the black tribes of Punt, and
certainly "at the earliest period in which human remains have been
recovered Egypt and Lower Nubia appear to have formed culturally and
racially one land."[13]

The forging ahead of Egypt in culture was mainly from economic causes.
Ethiopia, living in a much poorer land with limited agricultural
facilities, held to the old arts and customs, and at the same time lost
the best elements of its population to Egypt, absorbing meantime the
oncoming and wilder Negro tribes from the south and west. Under the old
empire, therefore, Ethiopia remained in comparative poverty, except as
some of its tribes invaded Egypt with their handicrafts.

As soon as the civilization below the Second Cataract reached a height
noticeably above that of Ethiopia, there was continued effort to protect
that civilization against the incursion of barbarians. Hundreds of
campaigns through thousands of years repeatedly subdued or checked the
blacks and brought them in as captives to mingle their blood with the
Egyptian nation; but the Egyptian frontier was not advanced.

A separate and independent Ethiopian culture finally began to arise during
the middle empire of Egypt and centered at Nepata and Meroe. Widespread
trade in gold, ivory, precious stones, skins, wood, and works of
handicraft arose.[14] The Negro began to figure as the great trader of
Egypt.

This new wealth of Ethiopia excited the cupidity of the Pharaohs and led
to aggression and larger intercourse, until at last, when the dread Hyksos
appeared, Ethiopia became both a physical and cultural refuge for
conquered Egypt. The legitimate Pharaohs moved to Thebes, nearer the
boundaries of Ethiopia, and from here, under Negroid rulers, Lower Egypt
was redeemed.

The ensuing new empire witnessed the gradual incorporation of Ethiopia
into Egypt, although the darker kingdom continued to resist. Both mulatto
Pharaohs, Aahmes and Amenhotep I, sent expeditions into Ethiopia, and in
the latter's day sons of the reigning Pharaoh began to assume the title of
"Royal Son of Kush" in some such way as the son of the King of England
becomes the Prince of Wales.

Trade relations were renewed with Punt under circumstances which lead us
to place that land in the region of the African lakes. The Sudanese tribes
were aroused by these and other incursions, until the revolts became
formidable in the fourteenth century before Christ.

Egyptian culture, however, gradually conquered Ethiopia where her armies
could not, and Egyptian religion and civil rule began to center in the
darker kingdom. When, therefore, Shesheng I, the Libyan, usurped the
throne of the Pharaohs in the tenth century B.C., the Egyptian legitimate
dynasty went to Nepata as king priests and established a theocratic
monarchy. Gathering strength, the Ethiopian kingdom under this dynasty
expanded north about 750 B.C. and for a century ruled all Egypt.

The first king, Pankhy, was Egyptian bred and not noticeably Negroid, but
his successors showed more and more evidence of Negro blood--Kashta the
Kushite, Shabaka, Tarharqa, and Tanutamen. During the century of Ethiopian
rule a royal son was appointed to rule Egypt, just as formerly a royal
Egyptian had ruled Kush. In many ways this Ethiopian kingdom showed its
Negro peculiarities: first, in its worship of distinctly Sudanese gods;
secondly, in the rigid custom of female succession in the kingdom, and
thirdly, by the election of kings from the various royal claimants to the
throne. "It was the heyday of the Negro. For the greater part of the
century ... Egypt itself was subject to the blacks, just as in the new
empire the Sudan had been subject to Egypt."[15]

Egypt now began to fall into the hands of Asia and was conquered first by
the Assyrians and then by the Persians, but the Ethiopian kings kept their
independence. Aspeluta, whose mother and sister are represented as
full-blooded Negroes, ruled from 630 to 600 B.C. Horsiatef (560-525 B.C.)
made nine expeditions against the warlike tribes south of Meroe, and his
successor, Nastosenen (525-500 B.C.) was the one who repelled Cambyses. He
also removed the capital from Nepata to Meroe, although Nepata continued
to be the religious capital and the Ethiopian kings were still crowned on
its golden throne.

From the fifth to the second century B.C. we find the wild Sudanese tribes
pressing in from the west and Greek culture penetrating from the east.
King Arg-Amen (Ergamenes) showed strong Greek influences and at the same
time began to employ the Ethiopian speech in writing and used a new
Ethiopian alphabet.

While the Ethiopian kings were still crowned at Nepata, Meroe gradually
became the real capital and supported at one time four thousand artisans
and two hundred thousand soldiers. It was here that the famous Candaces
reigned as queens. Pliny tells us that one Candace of the time of Nero had
had forty-four predecessors on the throne, while another Candace figures
in the New Testament.[16]

It was probably this latter Candace who warred against Rome at the time of
Augustus and received unusual consideration from her formidable foe. The
prestige of Ethiopia at this time was considerable throughout the world.
Pseudo-Callisthenes tells an evidently fabulous story of the visit of
Alexander the Great to Candace, Queen of Meroe, which nevertheless
illustrates her fame: Candace will not let him enter Ethiopia and says he
is not to scorn her people because they are black, for they are whiter in
soul than his white folk. She sent him gold, maidens, parrots, sphinxes,
and a crown of emeralds and pearls. She ruled eighty tribes, who were
ready to punish those who attacked her.

The Romans continued to have so much trouble with their Ethiopian frontier
that finally, when Semitic mulattoes appeared in the east, the Emperor
Diocletian invited the wild Sudanese tribe of Nubians (NobadÃ¦) from the
west to repel them. These Nubians eventually embraced Christianity, and
northern Ethiopia came to be known in time as Nubia.

The Semitic mulattoes from the east came from the highlands bordering the
Red Sea and Asia. On both sides of this sea Negro blood is strongly in
evidence, predominant in Africa and influential in Asia. Ludolphus,
writing in the seventeenth century, says that the Abyssinians "are
generally black, which [color] they most admire." Trade and war united the
two shores, and merchants have passed to and fro for thirty centuries.

In this way Arabian, Jewish, Egyptian, Greek, and Roman influences spread
slowly upon the Negro foundation. Early legendary history declares that a
queen, Maqueda, or Nikaula of Sheba, a state of Central Abyssinia, visited
Solomon in 1050 B.C. and had her son Menelik educated in Jerusalem. This
was the supposed beginning of the Axumite kingdom, the capital of which,
Axume, was a flourishing center of trade. Ptolemy Evergetes and his
successors did much to open Abyssinia to the world, but most of the
population of that day was nomadic. In the fourth century Byzantine
influences began to be felt, and in 330 St. Athanasius of Alexandria
consecrated Fromentius as Bishop of Ethiopia. He tutored the heir to the
Abyssinian kingdom and began its gradual christianization. By the early
part of the sixth century Abyssinia was trading with India and Byzantium
and was so far recognized as a Christian country that the Emperor
Justinian appealed to King Kaleb to protect the Christians in southwestern
Arabia. Kaleb conquered Yemen in 525 and held it fifty years.

Eventually a Jewish princess, Judith, usurped the Axumite throne; the
Abyssinians were expelled from Arabia, and a long period begins when as
Gibbon says, "encompassed by the enemies of their religion, the Ethiopians
slept for nearly a thousand years, forgetful of the world by whom they
were forgotten." Throughout the middle ages, however, the legend of a
great Christian kingdom hidden away in Africa persisted, and the search
for Prester John became one of the world quests.

It was the expanding power of Abyssinia that led Rome to call in the
Nubians from the western desert. The Nubians had formed a strong league of
tribes, and as the ancient kingdom of Ethiopia declined they drove back
the Abyssinians, who had already established themselves at Meroe.

In the sixth century the Nubians were converted to Christianity by a
Byzantine priest, and they immediately began to develop. A new capital,
Dongola, replaced Nepata and Meroe, and by the twelfth century churches
and brick dwellings had appeared. As the Mohammedan flood pressed up the
Nile valley it was the Nubians that held it back for two centuries.

Farther south other wild tribes pushed out of the Sudan and began a
similar development. Chief among these were the Fung, who fixed their
capital at Senaar, at the junction of the White and Blue Nile. When the
Mohammedan flood finally passed over Nubia, the Fung diverted it by
declaring themselves Moslems. This left the Fung as the dominant power in
the fifteenth century from the Three Cataracts to Fazogli and from the Red
Sea at Suakin to the White Nile. Islam then swept on south in a great
circle, skirted the Great Lakes, and then curled back to Somaliland,
completely isolating Abyssinia.

Between the thirteenth and sixteenth centuries the Egyptian Sudan became a
congeries of Mohammedan kingdoms with Arab, mulatto, and Negro kings. Far
to the west, near Lake Chad, arose in 1520 the sultanate of Baghirmi,
which reached its highest power in the seventh century. This dynasty was
overthrown by the Negroid Mabas, who established Wadai to the eastward
about 1640. South of Wadai lay the heathen and cannibals of the Congo
valley, against which Islam never prevailed. East of Wadai and nearer the
Nile lay the kindred state of Darfur, a Nubian nation whose sultans
reigned over two hundred years and which reached great prosperity in the
early seventeenth century under Soliman Solon.

Before the Mohammedan power reached Abyssinia the Portuguese pioneers had
entered the country from the east and begun to open the country again to
European knowledge. Without doubt, in the centuries of silence, a
civilization of some height had flourished in Abyssinia, but all authentic
records were destroyed by fire in the tenth century. When the Portuguese
came, the older Axumite kingdom had fallen and had been succeeded by a
number of petty states.

The Sudanese kingdoms of the Sudan resisted the power of the Mameluke beys
in Egypt, and later the power of the Turks until the nineteenth century,
when the Sudan was made nominally a part of Egypt. Continuous upheaval,
war, and conquest had by this time done their work, and little of ancient
Ethiopian culture survived except the slave trade.

The entrance of England into Egypt, after the building of the Suez Canal,
stirred up eventually revolt in the Sudan, for political, economic, and
religious reasons. Led by a Sudanese Negro, Mohammed Ahmad, who claimed to
be the Messiah (Mahdi), the Sudan arose in revolt in 1881, determined to
resist a hated religion, foreign rule, and interference with their chief
commerce, the trade in slaves. The Sudan was soon aflame, and the able
mulatto general, Osman Digna, aided by revolt among the heathen Dinka,
drove Egypt and England out of the Sudan for sixteen years. It was not
until 1898 that England reÃ«ntered the Sudan and in petty revenge
desecrated the bones of the brave, even if misguided, prophet.

Meantime this Mahdist revolt had delayed England's designs on Abyssinia,
and the Italians, replacing her, attempted a protectorate. Menelik of
Shoa, one of the smaller kingdoms of Abyssinia, was a shrewd man of
predominantly Negro blood, and had been induced to make a treaty with the
Italians after King John had been killed by the Mahdists. The exact terms
of the treaty were disputed, but undoubtedly the Italians tried by this
means to reduce Menelik to vassalage. Menelik stoutly resisted, and at the
great battle of Adua, one of the decisive battles of the modern world, the
Abyssinians on March 1, 1896, inflicted a crushing defeat on the Italians,
killing four thousand of them and capturing two thousand prisoners. The
empress, Taitou, a full-blooded Negress, led some of the charges. By this
battle Abyssinia became independent.

Such in vague and general outline is the strange story of the valley of
the Nile--of Egypt, the motherland of human culture and

"That starr'd Ethiop Queen that strove To set her beauty's praise above
The sea nymphs."

FOOTNOTES:

[4] [Greek: "autos de eikasa tÃªde kai hote melanchroes eisi kai
oulotriches."] Liber II, Cap. 104.

[5] Cf. Maciver and Thompson: _Ancient Races of the Thebaid_.

[6] _Journal of Race Development_, I, 484.

[7] Petrie: _History of Egypt_, I, 51, 237.

[8] _From West Africa to Palestine_, p. 114.

[9] Depending partly on whether the so-called Hyksos sphinxes belong to
the period of the Hyksos kings or to an earlier period (cf. Petrie, I,
52-53, 237). That Negroids largely dominated in the early history of
western Asia is proven by the monuments.

[10] Petrie: _History of Egypt_, II, 337.

[11] Chamberlain: _Journal of Race Development_, April, 1911.

[12] Petrie: _History of Egypt_, II, 337.

[13] Reisner: _Archeological Survey of Nubia_, I, 319.

[14] Hoskins declares that the arch had its origin in Ethiopia.

[15] Maciver and Wooley: _Areika_, p. 2.

[16] Acts VIII, 27.




IV THE NIGER AND ISLAM


The Arabian expression "Bilad es Sudan" (Land of the Blacks) was applied
to the whole region south of the Sahara, from the Atlantic to the Nile. It
is a territory some thirty-five hundred miles by six hundred miles,
containing two million square miles, and has to-day a population of
perhaps eighty million. It is thus two-thirds the size of the United
States and quite as thickly settled. In the western Sudan the Niger plays
the same role as the Nile in the east. In this chapter we follow the
history of the Niger.

The history of this part of Africa was probably something as follows:
primitive man, entering Africa from Arabia, found the Great Lakes, spread
in the Nile valley, and wandered westward to the Niger. Herodotus tells of
certain youths who penetrated the desert to the Niger and found there a
city of black dwarfs. Succeeding migrations of Negroes and Negroids pushed
the dwarfs gradually into the inhospitable forests and occupied the Sudan,
pushing on to the Atlantic. Here the newcomers, curling northward, met the
Mediterranean race coming down across the western desert, while to the
southward the Negro came to the Gulf of Guinea and the thick forests of
the Congo valley. Indigenous civilizations arose on the west coast in
Yoruba and Benin, and contact of these with the Mediterranean race in the
desert, and with Egyptian and Arab from the east, gave rise to centers of
Negro culture in the Sudan at Ghana and Melle and in Songhay, Nupe, the
Hausa states, and Bornu.

The history of the Sudan thus leads us back again to Ethiopia, that
strange and ancient center of world civilization whose inhabitants in the
ancient world were considered to be the most pious and the oldest of men.
From this center the black originators of African culture, and to a large
degree of world culture, wandered not simply down the Nile, but also
westward. These Negroes developed the original substratum of culture which
later influences modified but never displaced.

We know that Egyptian Pharaohs in several cases ventured into the western
Sudan and that Egyptian influences are distinctly traceable. Greek and
Byzantine culture and Phoenician and Carthaginian trade also penetrated,
while Islam finally made this whole land her own. Behind all these
influences, however, stood from the first an indigenous Negro culture. The
stone figures of Sherbro, the megaliths of Gambia, the art and industry of
the west coast are all too deep and original evidences of civilization to
be merely importations from abroad.

Nor was the Sudan the inert recipient of foreign influence when it came.
According to credible legend, the "Great King" at Byzantium imported
glass, tin, silver, bronze, cut stones, and other treasure from the Sudan.
Embassies were sent and states like Nupe recognized the suzerainty of the
Byzantine emperor. The people of Nupe especially were filled with pride
when the Byzantine people learned certain kinds of work in bronze and
glass from them, and this intercourse was only interrupted by the
Mohammedan conquest.

To this ancient culture, modified somewhat by Byzantine and Christian
influences, came Islam. It approached from the northwest, coming
stealthily and slowly and being handed on particularly by the Mandingo
Negroes. About 1000-1200 A.D. the situation was this: Ghana was on the
edge of the desert in the north, Mandingoland between the Niger and the
Senegal in the south and the western Sahara, Djolof was in the west on the
Senegal, and the Songhay on the Niger in the center. The Mohammedans came
chiefly as traders and found a trade already established. Here and there
in the great cities were districts set aside for these new merchants, and
the Mohammedans gave frequent evidence of their respect for these black
nations.

Islam did not found new states, but modified and united Negro states
already ancient; it did not initiate new commerce, but developed a
widespread trade already established. It is, as Frobenius says, "easily
proved from chronicles written in Arabic that Islam was only effective in
fact as a fertilizer and stimulant. The essential point is the
resuscitative and invigorative concentration of Negro power in the service
of a new era and a Moslem propaganda, as well as the reaction thereby
produced."[17]

Early in the eighth century Islam had conquered North Africa and converted
the Berbers. Aided by black soldiers, the Moslems crossed into Spain; in
the following century Berber and Arab armies crossed the west end of the
Sahara and came to Negroland. Later in the eleventh century Arabs
penetrated the Sudan and Central Africa from the east, filtering through
the Negro tribes of Darfur, Kanem, and neighboring regions. The Arabs were
too nearly akin to Negroes to draw an absolute color line. Antar, one of
the great pre-Islamic poets of Arabia, was the son of a black woman, and
one of the great poets at the court of Haroun al Raschid was black. In the
twelfth century a learned Negro poet resided at Seville, and Sidjilmessa,
the last town in Lower Morocco toward the desert, was founded in 757 by a
Negro who ruled over the Berber inhabitants. Indeed, many towns in the
Sudan and the desert were thus ruled, and felt no incongruity in this
arrangement. They say, to be sure, that the Moors destroyed Audhoghast
because it paid tribute to the black town of Ghana, but this was because
the town was heathen and not because it was black. On the other hand,
there is a story that a Berber king overthrew one of the cities of the
Sudan and all the black women committed suicide, being too proud to allow
themselves to fall into the hands of white men.

In the west the Moslems first came into touch with the Negro kingdom of
Ghana. Here large quantities of gold were gathered in early days, and we
have names of seventy-four rulers before 300 A.D. running through
twenty-one generations. This would take us back approximately a thousand
years to 700 B.C., or about the time that Pharaoh Necho of Egypt sent out
the Phoenician expedition which circumnavigated Africa, and possibly
before the time when Hanno, the Carthaginian, explored the west coast of
Africa.

By the middle of the eleventh century Ghana was the principal kingdom in
the western Sudan. Already the town had a native and a Mussulman quarter,
and was built of wood and stone with surrounding gardens. The king had an
army of two hundred thousand and the wealth of the country was great. A
century later the king had become Mohammedan in faith and had a palace
with sculptures and glass windows. The great reason for this development
was the desert trade. Gold, skins, ivory, kola nuts, gums, honey, wheat,
and cotton were exported, and the whole Mediterranean coast traded in the
Sudan. Other and lesser black kingdoms like Tekrou, Silla, and Masina
surrounded Ghana.

In the early part of the thirteenth century the prestige of Ghana began to
fall before the rising Mandingan kingdom to the west. Melle, as it was
called, was founded in 1235 and formed an open door for Moslem and Moorish
traders. The new kingdom, helped by its expanding trade, began to grow,
and Islam slowly surrounded the older Negro culture west, north, and east.
However, a great mass of the older heathen culture, pushing itself upward
from the Guinea coast, stood firmly against Islam down to the nineteenth
century.

Steadily Mohammedanism triumphed in the growing states which almost
encircled the protagonists of ancient Atlantic culture. Mandingan Melle
eventually supplanted Ghana in prestige and power, after Ghana had been
overthrown by the heathen Su Su from the south.

The territory of Melle lay southeast of Ghana and some five hundred miles
north of the Gulf of Guinea. Its kings were known by the title of Mansa,
and from the middle of the thirteenth century to the middle of the
fourteenth the Mellestine, as its dominion was called, was the leading
power in the land of the blacks. Its greatest king, Mari Jalak (Mansa
Musa), made his pilgrimage to Mecca in 1324, with a caravan of sixty
thousand persons, including twelve thousand young slaves gowned in figured
cotton and Persian silk. He took eighty camel loads of gold dust (worth
about five million dollars) to defray his expenses, and greatly impressed
the people of the East with his magnificence.

On his return he found that Timbuktu had been sacked by the Mossi, but he
rebuilt the town and filled the new mosque with learned blacks from the
University of Fez. Mansa Musa reigned twenty-five years and "was
distinguished by his ability and by the holiness of his life. The justice
of his administration was such that the memory of it still lives."[18] The
Mellestine preserved its preÃ«minence until the beginning of the sixteenth
century, when the rod of Sudanese empire passed to Songhay, the largest
and most famous of the black empires.

The known history of Songhay covers a thousand years and three dynasties
and centers in the great bend of the Niger. There were thirty kings of the
First Dynasty, reigning from 700 to 1335. During the reign of one of these
the Songhay kingdom became the vassal kingdom of Melle, then at the height
of its glory. In addition to this the Mossi crossed the valley, plundered
Timbuktu in 1339, and separated Jenne, the original seat of the Songhay,
from the main empire. The sixteenth king was converted to Mohammedanism in
1009, and after that all the Songhay princes were Mohammedans. Mansa Musa
took two young Songhay princes to the court of Melle to be educated in
1326. These boys when grown ran away and founded a new dynasty in Songhay,
that of the Sonnis, in 1355. Seventeen of these kings reigned, the last
and greatest being Sonni Ali, who ascended the throne in 1464. Melle was
at this time declining, other cities like Jenne, with its seven thousand
villages, were rising, and the Tuaregs (Berbers with Negro blood) had
captured Timbuktu.

Sonni Ali was a soldier and began his career with the conquest of Timbuktu
in 1469. He also succeeded in capturing Jenne and attacked the Mossi and
other enemies on all sides. Finally he concentrated his forces for the
destruction of Melle and subdued nearly the whole empire on the west bend
of the Niger. In summing up Sonni Ali's military career the chronicle says
of him, "He surpassed all his predecessors in the numbers and valor of his
soldiery. His conquests were many and his renown extended from the rising
to the setting of the sun. If it is the will of God, he will be long
spoken of."[19]

Sonni Ali was a Songhay Negro whose father was a Berber. He was succeeded
by a full-blooded black, Mohammed Abou Bekr, who had been his prime
minister. Mohammed was hailed as "Askia" (usurper) and is best known as
Mohammed Askia. He was strictly orthodox where Ali was rather a scoffer,
and an organizer where Ali was a warrior. On his pilgrimage to Mecca in
1495 there was nothing of the barbaric splendor of Mansa Musa, but a
brilliant group of scholars and holy men with a small escort of fifteen
hundred soldiers and nine hundred thousand dollars in gold. He stopped and
consulted with scholars and politicians and studied matters of taxation,
weights and measures, trade, religious tolerance, and manners. In Cairo,
where he was invested by the reigning caliph of Egypt, he may have heard
of the struggle of Europe for the trade of the Indies, and perhaps of the
parceling of the new world between Portugal and Spain. He returned to the
Sudan in 1497, instituted a standing army of slaves, undertook a holy war
against the indomitable Mossi, and finally marched against the Hausa. He
subdued these cities and even imposed the rule of black men on the Berber
town of Agades, a rich city of merchants and artificers with stately
mansions. In fine Askia, during his reign, conquered and consolidated an
empire two thousand miles long by one thousand wide at its greatest
diameters; a territory as large as all Europe. The territory was divided
into four vice royalties, and the system of Melle, with its
semi-independent native dynasties, was carried out. His empire extended
from the Atlantic to Lake Chad and from the salt mines of Tegazza and the
town of Augila in the north to the 10th degree of north latitude toward
the south.

It was a six months' journey across the empire and, it is said, "he was
obeyed with as much docility on the farthest limits of the empire as he
was in his own palace, and there reigned everywhere great plenty and
absolute peace."[20] The University of Sankore became a center of learning
in correspondence with Egypt and North Africa and had a swarm of black
Sudanese students. Law, literature, grammar, geography and surgery were
studied. Askia the Great reigned thirty-six years, and his dynasty
continued on the throne until after the Moorish conquest in 1591.

Meanwhile, to the eastward, two powerful states appeared. They never
disputed the military supremacy of Songhay, but their industrial
development was marvelous. The Hausa states were formed by seven original
cities, of which Kano was the oldest and Katsena the most famous. Their
greatest leaders, Mohammed Rimpa and Ahmadu Kesoke, arose in the fifteenth
and early sixteenth centuries. The land was subject to the Songhay, but
the cities became industrious centers of smelting, weaving, and dyeing.
Katsena especially, in the middle of the sixteenth century, is described
as a place thirteen or fourteen miles in circumference, divided into
quarters for strangers, for visitors from various other states, and for
the different trades and industries, as saddlers, shoemakers, dyers, etc.

Beyond the Hausa states and bordering on Lake Chad was Bornu. The people
of Bornu had a large infiltration of Berber blood, but were predominantly
Negro. Berber mulattoes had been kings in early days, but they were soon
replaced by black men. Under the early kings, who can be traced back to
the third century, these people had ruled nearly all the territory between
the Nile and Lake Chad. The country was known as Kanem, and the pagan
dynasty of Dugu reigned there from the middle of the ninth to the end of
the eleventh century. Mohammedanism was introduced from Egypt at the end
of the eleventh century, and under the Mohammedan kings Kanem became one
of the first powers of the Sudan. By the end of the twelfth century the
armies of Kanem were very powerful and its rulers were known as "Kings of
Kanem and Lords of Bornu." In the thirteenth century the kings even dared
to invade the southern country down toward the valley of the Congo.

Meantime great things were happening in the world beyond the desert, the
ocean, and the Nile. Arabian Mohammedanism had succumbed to the wild
fanaticism of the Seljukian Turks. These new conquerors were not only
firmly planted at the gates of Vienna, but had swept the shores of the
Mediterranean and sent all Europe scouring the seas for their lost trade
connections with the riches of India. Religious zeal, fear of conquest,
and commercial greed inflamed Europe against the Mohammedan and led to the
discovery of a new world, the riches of which poured first on Spain.
Oppression of the Moors followed, and in 1502 they were driven back into
Africa, despoiled and humbled. Here the Spaniards followed and harassed
them and here the Turks, fighting the Christians, captured the
Mediterranean ports and cut the Moors off permanently from Europe. In the
slow years that followed, huddled in Northwest Africa, they became a
decadent people and finally cast their eyes toward Negroland.

The Moors in Morocco had come to look upon the Sudan as a gold mine, and
knew that the Sudan was especially dependent upon salt. In 1545 Morocco
claimed the principal salt mines at Tegazza, but the reigning Askia
refused to recognize the claim.

When the Sultan Elmansour came to the throne of Morocco, he increased the
efficiency of his army by supplying it with fire arms and cannon.
Elmansour determined to attack the Sudan and sent four hundred men under
Pasha Djouder, who left Morocco in 1590. The Songhay, with their bows and
arrows, were helpless against powder and shot, and they were defeated at
Tenkadibou April 12, 1591. Askia Ishak, the king, offered terms, and
Djouder Pasha referred them to Morocco. The sultan, angry with his
general's delay, deposed him and sent another, who crushed and
treacherously murdered the king and set up a puppet. Thereafter there were
two Askias, one under the Moors at Timbuktu and one who maintained himself
in the Hausa states, which the Moors could not subdue. Anarchy reigned in
Songhay. The Moors tried to put down disorder with a high hand, drove out
and murdered the distinguished men of Timbuktu, and as a result let loose
a riot of robbery and decadence throughout the Sudan. Pasha now succeeded
pasha with revolt and misrule until in 1612 the soldiers elected their own
pasha and deliberately shut themselves up in the Sudan by cutting off
approach from the north.

Hausaland and Bornu were still open to Turkish and Mohammedan influence
from the east, and the Gulf of Guinea to the slave trade from the south,
but the face of the finest Negro civilization the modern world had ever
produced was veiled from Europe and given to the defilement of wild
Moorish soldiers. In 1623 it is written "excesses of every kind are now
committed unchecked by the soldiery," and "the country is profoundly
convulsed and oppressed."[21] The Tuaregs marched down from the desert and
deprived the Moors of many of the principal towns. The rest of the empire
of the Songhay was by the end of the eighteenth century divided among
separate Moorish chiefs, who bought supplies from the Negro peasantry and
were "at once the vainest, proudest, and perhaps the most bigoted,
ferocious, and intolerant of all the nations of the south."[22] They lived
a nomadic life, plundering the Negroes. To such depths did the mighty
Songhay fall.

As the Songhay declined a new power arose in the nineteenth century, the
Fula. The Fula, who vary in race from Berber mulattoes to full-blooded
Negroes, may be the result of a westward migration of some people like the
"LeukoÃ¦thiopi" of Pliny, or they may have arisen from the migration of
Berber mulattoes in the western oases, driven south by Romans and Arabs.

These wandering herdsmen lived on the Senegal River and the ocean in very
early times and were not heard of until the nineteenth century. By this
time they had changed to a Negro or dark mulatto people and lived
scattered in small communities between the Atlantic and Darfur. They were
without political union or national sentiment, but were all Mohammedans.
Then came a sudden change, and led by a religious fanatic, these despised
and persecuted people became masters of the central Sudan. They were the
ones who at last broke down that great wedge of resisting Atlantic
culture, after it had been undermined and disintegrated by the American
slave trade.

Thus Islam finally triumphed in the Sudan and the ancient culture combined
with the new. In the Sudan to-day one may find evidences of the union of
two classes of people. The representatives of the older civilization dwell
as peasants in small communities, carrying on industries and speaking a
large number of different languages. With them or above them is the ruling
Mohammedan caste, speaking four main languages: Mandingo, Hausa, Fula, and
Arabic. These latter form the state builders. Negro blood predominates
among both classes, but naturally there is more Berber blood among the
Mohammedan invaders.

Europe during the middle ages had some knowledge of these movements in the
Sudan and Africa. Melle and Songhay appear on medieval maps. In literature
we have many allusions: the mulatto king, Feirifis, was one of Wolfram von
Eschenbach's heroes; Prester John furnished endless lore; Othello, the
warrior, and the black king represented by medieval art as among the three
wise men, and the various black Virgin Marys' all show legendary knowledge
of what African civilization was at that time doing.

It is a curious commentary on modern prejudice that most of this splendid
history of civilization and uplift is unknown to-day, and men confidently
assert that Negroes have no history.

FOOTNOTES:

[17] Frobenius: _Voice of Africa_, II, 359-360.

[18] Ibn Khaldun, quoted in Lugard, p. 128.

[19] Quoted in Lugard, p. 180.

[20] Es-Sa 'di, quoted by Lugard, p. 199.

[21] Lugard, p. 373.

[22] Mungo Park, quoted in Lugard, p. 374.




V GUINEA AND CONGO


One of the great cities of the Sudan was Jenne. The chronicle says "that
its markets are held every day of the week and its populations are very
enormous. Its seven thousand villages are so near to one another that the
chief of Jenne has no need of messengers. If he wishes to send a note to
Lake Dibo, for instance, it is cried from the gate of the town and
repeated from village to village, by which means it reaches its
destination almost instantly."[23]



From the name of this city we get the modern name Guinea, which is used
to-day to designate the country contiguous to the great gulf of that
name--a territory often referred to in general as West Africa. Here,
reaching from the mouth of the Gambia to the mouth of the Niger, is a
coast of six hundred miles, where a marvelous drama of world history has
been enacted. The coast and its hinterland comprehends many well-known
names. First comes ancient Guinea, then, modern Sierra Leone and Liberia;
then follow the various "coasts" of ancient traffic--the grain, ivory,
gold, and slave coasts--with the adjoining territories of Ashanti,
Dahomey, Lagos, and Benin, and farther back such tribal and territorial
names as those of the Mandingoes, Yorubas, the Mossi, Nupe, Borgu, and
others.

Recent investigation makes it certain that an ancient civilization existed
on this coast which may have gone back as far as three thousand years
before Christ. Frobenius, perhaps fancifully, identified this African
coast with the Atlantis of the Greeks and as part of that great western
movement in human culture, "beyond the pillars of Hercules," which
thirteen centuries before Christ strove with Egypt and the East. It is, at
any rate, clear that ancient commerce reached down the west coast. The
Phoenicians, 600 B.C., and the Carthaginians, a century or more later,
record voyages, and these may have been attempted revivals of still more
ancient intercourse.

These coasts at some unknown prehistoric period were peopled from the
Niger plateau toward the north and west by the black West African type of
Negro, while along the west end of the desert these Negroes mingled with
the Berbers, forming various Negroid races.

Movement and migration is evident along this coast in ancient and modern
times. The Yoruba-Benin-Dahomey peoples were among the earliest arrivals,
with their remarkable art and industry, which places them in some lines of
technique abreast with the modern world. Behind them came the Mossi from
the north, and many other peoples in recent days have filtered through,
like the Limba and Temni of Sierra Leone and the Agni-Ashanti, who moved
from Borgu some two thousand years ago to the Gold and Ivory coasts.

We have already noted in the main the history of black men along the
wonderful Niger and seen how, pushing up from the Gulf of Guinea, a
powerful wedge of ancient culture held back Islam for a thousand years,
now victorious, now stubbornly disputing every inch of retreat. The center
of this culture lay probably, in oldest times, above the Bight of Benin,
along the Slave Coast, and reached east, west, and north. We trace it
to-day not only in the remarkable tradition of the natives, but in stone
monuments, architecture, industrial and social organization, and works of
art in bronze, glass, and terra cotta.

Benin art has been practiced without interruption for centuries, and Von
Luschan says that it is "of extraordinary significance that by the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries a local and monumental art had been
learned in Benin which in many respects equaled European art and developed
a technique of the very highest accomplishment."[24]

Summing up Yoruban civilization, Frobenius concluded that "the technical
summit of that civilization was reached in the terra-cotta industry, and
that the most important achievements in art were not expressed in stone,
but in fine clay baked in the furnace; that hollow casting was thoroughly
known, too, and practiced by these people; that iron was mainly used for
decoration; that, whatever their purpose, they kept their glass beads in
stoneware urns within their own locality, and that they manufactured both
earthen and glass ware; that the art of weaving was highly developed among
them; that the stone monuments, it is true, show some dexterity in
handling and are so far instructive, but in other respects evidence a
cultural condition insufficiently matured to grasp the utility of stone
monumental material; and, above all, that the then great and significant
idea of the universe as imaged in the Templum was current in those
days."[25]

Effort has naturally been made to ascribe this civilization to white
people. First it was ascribed to Portuguese influence, but much of it is
evidently older than the Portuguese discovery. Egypt and India have been
evoked and Greece and Carthage. But all these explanations are
far-fetched. If ever a people exhibited unanswerable evidence of
indigenous civilization, it is the west-coast Africans. Undoubtedly they
adapted much that came to them, utilized new ideas, and grew from contact.
But their art and culture is Negro through and through.

Yoruba forms one of the three city groups of West Africa; another is
around Timbuktu, and a third in the Hausa states. The Timbuktu cities have
from five to fifteen hundred towns, while the Yoruba cities have one
hundred and fifty thousand inhabitants and more. The Hausa cities are many
of them important, but few are as large as the Yoruba cities and they lie
farther apart. AH three centers, however, are connected with the Niger,
and the group nearest the coast--that is, the Yoruba cities--has the
greatest numbers of towns, the most developed architectural styles, and
the oldest institutions.

The Yoruba cities are not only different from the Sudanese in population,
but in their social relations. The Sudanese cities were influenced from
the desert and the Mediterranean, and form nuclei of larger surrounding
monarchial states. The Yoruba cities, on the other hand, remained
comparatively autonomous organizations down to modern times, and their
relative importance changed from time to time without developing an
imperialistic idea or subordinating the group to one overpowering city.

This social and industrial state of the Yorubas formerly spread and
wielded great influence. We find Yoruba reaching out and subduing states
like Nupe toward the northward. But the industrial democracy and city
autonomy of Yoruba lent itself indifferently to conquest, and the state
fell eventually a victim to the fanatical Fula Mohammedans and was made a
part of the modern sultanate of Gando.

West of Yoruba on the lower courses of the Niger is Benin, an ancient
state which in 1897 traced its twenty-three kings back one thousand years;
some legends even named a line of sixty kings. It seems probable that
Benin developed the imperial idea and once extended its rule into the
Congo valley. Later and also to the west of the Yoruba come two states
showing a fiercer and ruder culture, Dahomey and Ashanti. The state of
Dahomey was founded by Tacondomi early in the seventeenth century, and
developed into a fierce and bloody tyranny with wholesale murder. The king
had a body of two thousand to five thousand Amazons renowned for their
bravery and armed with rifles. The kingdom was overthrown by the French in
1892-93. Under Sai Tutu, Ashanti arose to power in the seventeenth
century. A military aristocracy with cruel blood sacrifices was formed. By
1816 the king had at his disposal two hundred thousand soldiers. The
Ashanti power was crushed by the English in the war of 1873-74.

In these states and in later years in Benin the whole character of
west-coast culture seems to change. In place of the Yoruban culture, with
its city democracy, its elevated religious ideas, its finely organized
industry, and its noble art, came Ashanti and Dahomey. What was it that
changed the character of the west coast from this to the orgies of war and
blood sacrifice which we read of later in these lands?

There can be but one answer: the slave trade. Not simply the sale of men,
but an organized traffic of such proportions and widely organized
ramifications as to turn the attention and energies of men from nearly all
other industries, encourage war and all the cruelest passions of war, and
concentrate this traffic in precisely that part of Africa farthest from
the ancient Mediterranean lines of trade.

We need not assume that the cultural change was sudden or absolute.
Ancient Yoruba had the cruelty of a semi-civilized land, but it was not
dominant or tyrannical. Modern Benin and Dahomey showed traces of skill,
culture, and industry along with inexplicable cruelty and
bloodthirstiness. But it was the slave trade that turned the balance and
set these lands backward. Dahomey was the last word in a series of human
disasters which began with the defeat of the Askias at Tenkadibou.[26]

From the middle of the fifteenth to the last half of the nineteenth
centuries the American slave trade centered in Guinea and devastated the
coast morally, socially, and physically. European rum and fire arms were
traded for human beings, and it was not until 1787 that any measures were
taken to counteract this terrible scourge. In that year the idea arose of
repatriating stolen Negroes on that coast and establishing civilized
centers to supplant the slave trade. About four hundred Negroes from
England were sent to Sierra Leone, to whom the promoters considerately
added sixty white prostitutes as wives. The climate on the low coast,
however, was so deadly that new recruits were soon needed. An American
Negro, Thomas Peters, who had served as sergeant under Sir Henry Clinton
in the British army in America, went to England seeking an allotment of
land for his fellows. The Sierra Leone Company welcomed him and offered
free passage and land in Sierra Leone to the Negroes of Nova Scotia. As a
result fifteen vessels sailed with eleven hundred and ninety Negroes in
1792. Arriving in Africa, they found the chief white man in control there
so drunk that he soon died of delirium tremens. John Clarkson, however,
brother of Thomas Clarkson, the abolitionist, eventually took the lead,
founded Freetown, and the colony began its checkered career. In 1896 the
colony was saved from insurrection by the exiled Maroon Negroes from
Jamaica. After 1833, when emancipation in English colonies took place,
severer measures against the slave trade was possible and the colony began
to grow. To-day its imports and exports amount to fifteen million dollars
a year.

Liberia was a similar American experiment. In 1816 American
philanthropists decided that slavery was bound to die out, but that the
problem lay in getting rid of the freed Negroes, of which there were then
two hundred thousand in the United States. Accordingly the American
Colonization Society was proposed this year and founded January 1, 1817,
with Bushrod Washington as President. It was first thought to encourage
migration to Sierra Leone, and eighty-eight Negroes were sent, but they
were not welcomed. As a result territory was bought in the present
confines of Liberia, December 15, 1821, and colonists began to arrive. A
little later an African depot for recaptured slaves taken in the
contraband slave trade, provided for in the Act of 1819, was established
and an agent was sent to Africa to form a settlement. Gradually this
settlement was merged with the settlement of the Colonization Society, and
from this union Liberia was finally evolved.

The last white governor of Liberia died in 1841 and was succeeded by the
first colored governor, Joseph J. Roberts, a Virginian. The total
population in 1843 was about twenty-seven hundred and ninety, and with
this as a beginning in 1847 Governor Roberts declared the independence of
the state. The recognition of Liberian independence by all countries
except the United States followed in 1849. The United States, not wishing
to receive a Negro minister, did not recognize Liberia until 1862.

No sooner was the independence of Liberia announced than England and
France began a long series of aggressions to limit her territory and
sovereignty. Considerable territory was lost by treaty, and in the effort
to get capital to develop the rest, Liberia was saddled with a debt of
four hundred thousand dollars, of which she received less than one hundred
thousand dollars in actual cash. Finally the Liberians turned to the
United States for capital and protection. As a result the Liberian customs
have been put under international control and Major Charles Young, the
ranking Negro officer in the United States army, with several colored
assistants, has been put in charge of the making of roads and drilling a
constabulary to keep order in the interior.

To-day Liberia has an area of forty thousand square miles, about three
hundred and fifty miles of coast line, and an estimated total population
of two million of which fifty thousand are civilized. The revenue amounted
in 1913 to $531,500. The imports in 1912 were $1,667,857 and the exports
$1,199,152. The latter consisted chiefly of rubber, palm oil and kernels,
coffee, piassava fiber, ivory, ginger, camwood, and arnotto.

Perhaps Liberia's greatest citizen was the late Edward Wilmot Blyden, who
migrated in early life from the Danish West Indies and became a prophet of
the renaissance of the Negro race.

Turning now from Guinea we pass down the west coast. In 1482 Diego Cam of
Portugal, sailing this coast, set a stone at the mouth of a great river
which he called "The Mighty," but which eventually came to be known by the
name of the powerful Negro kingdom through which it flowed--the Congo.

We must think of the valley of the Congo with its intricate interlacing of
water routes and jungle of forests as a vast caldron shut away at first
from the African world by known and unknown physical hindrances. Then it
was penetrated by the tiny red dwarfs and afterward horde after horde of
tall black men swirled into the valley like a maelstrom, moving usually
from north to east and from south to west.

The Congo valley became, therefore, the center of the making of what we
know to-day as the Bantu nations. They are not a unified people, but a
congeries of tribes of considerable physical diversity, united by the
compelling bond of language and other customs imposed on the conquered by
invading conquerors.

The history or these invasions we must to-day largely imagine. Between two
and three thousand years ago the wilder tribes of Negroes began to move
out of the region south or southeast of Lake Chad. This was always a land
of shadows and legends, where fearful cannibals dwelt and where no
Egyptian or Ethiopian or Sudanese armies dared to go. It is possible,
however, that pressure from civilization in the Nile valley and rising
culture around Lake Chad was at this time reÃ«nforced by expansion of the
Yoruba-Benin culture on the west coast. Perhaps, too, developing culture
around the Great Lakes in the east beckoned or the riotous fertility of
the Congo valleys became known. At any rate the movement commenced, now by
slow stages, now in wild forays. There may have been a preliminary
movement from east to west to the Gulf of Guinea. The main movement,
however, was eastward, skirting the Congo forests and passing down by the
Victoria Nyanza and Lake Tanganyika. Here two paths beckoned: the lakes
and the sea to the east, the Congo to the west. A great stream of men
swept toward the ocean and, dividing, turned northward and fought its way
down the Nile valley and into the Abyssinian highlands; another branch
turned south and approached the Zambesi, where we shall meet it again.

Another horde of invaders turned westward and entered the valley of the
Congo in three columns. The northern column moved along the Lualaba and
Congo rivers to the Cameroons; the second column became the industrial and
state-building Luba and Lunda peoples in the southern Congo valley and
Angola; while the third column moved into Damaraland and mingled with
Bushman and Hottentot.

In the Congo valley the invaders settled in village and plain, absorbed
such indigenous inhabitants as they found or drove them deeper into the
forest, and immediately began to develop industry and political
organization. They became skilled agriculturists, raising in some
localities a profusion of cereals, fruit, and vegetables such as manioc,
maize, yams, sweet potatoes, ground nuts, sorghum, gourds, beans, peas,
bananas, and plantains. Everywhere they showed skill in mining and the
welding of iron, copper, and other metals. They made weapons, wire and
ingots, cloth, and pottery, and a widespread system of trade arose. Some
tribes extracted rubber from the talamba root; others had remarkable
breeds of fowl and cattle, and still others divided their people by crafts
into farmers, smiths, boat builders, warriors, cabinet makers, armorers,
and speakers. Women here and there took part in public assemblies and were
rulers in some cases. Large towns were built, some of which required hours
to traverse from end to end.

Many tribes developed intelligence of a high order. Wissmann called the Ba
Luba "a nation of thinkers." Bateman found them "thoroughly and
unimpeachably honest, brave to foolhardiness, and faithful to each other
and to their superiors." One of their kings, Calemba, "a really princely
prince," Bateman says would "amongst any people be a remarkable and indeed
in many respects a magnificent man."[27]

These beginnings of human culture were, however, peculiarly vulnerable to
invading hosts of later comers. There were no natural protecting barriers
like the narrow Nile valley or the Kong mountains or the forests below
Lake Chad. Once the pathways to the valley were open and for hundreds of
years the newcomers kept arriving, especially from the welter of tribes
south of the Sudan and west of the Nile, which rising culture beyond kept
in unrest and turmoil.

Against these intruders there was but one defense, the State. State
building was thus forced on the Congo valley. How early it started we
cannot say, but when the Portuguese arrived in the fifteenth century,
there had existed for centuries a large state among the Ba-Congo, with its
capital at the city now known as San Salvador.

The Negro Mfumu, or emperor, was eventually induced to accept
Christianity. His sons and many young Negroes of high birth were taken to
Portugal to be educated. There several were raised to the Catholic
priesthood and one became bishop; others distinguished themselves at the
universities. Thus suddenly there arose a Catholic kingdom south of the
valley of the Congo, which lasted three centuries, but was partially
overthrown by invading barbarians from the interior in the seventeenth
century. A king of Congo still reigns as pensioner of Portugal, and on the
coast to-day are the remains of the kingdom in the civilized blacks and
mulattoes, who are intelligent traders and boat builders.

Meantime the Luba-Lunda people to the eastward founded Kantanga and other
states, and in the sixteenth century the larger and more ambitious realm
of the Mwata Yamvo. The last of the fourteen rulers of this line was
feudal lord of about three hundred chiefs, who paid him tribute in ivory,
skins, corn, cloth, and salt. His territory included about one hundred
thousand square miles and two million or more inhabitants. Eventually this
state became torn by internal strife and revolt, especially by attacks
from the south across the Congo-Zambesi divide.

Farther north, among the Ba-Lolo and the Ba-Songo, the village policy
persisted and the cannibals of the northeast pressed down on the more
settled tribes. The result was a curious blending of war and industry,
artistic tastes and savage customs.

The organized slave trade of the Arabs penetrated the Congo valley in the
sixteenth century and soon was aiding all the forces of unrest and
turmoil. Industry was deranged and many tribes forced to take refuge in
caves and other hiding places.

Here, as on the west coast, disintegration and retrogression followed, for
as the American traffic lessened, the Arabian traffic increased. When,
therefore, Stanley opened the Congo valley to modern knowledge, Leopold II
of Belgium conceived the idea of founding here a free international state
which was to bring civilization to the heart of Africa. Consequently there
was formed in 1878 an international committee to study the region. Stanley
was finally commissioned to inquire as to the best way of introducing
European trade and culture. "I am charged," he said, "to open and keep
open, if possible, all such districts and countries as I may explore, for
the benefit of the commercial world. The mission is supported by a
philanthropic society, which numbers nobleminded men of several nations.
It is not a religious society, but my instructions are entirely of that
spirit. No violence must be used, and wherever rejected, the mission must
withdraw to seek another field."[28]

The Bula Matadi or Stone Breaker, as the natives called Stanley, threw
himself energetically into the work and had by 1881 built a road past the
falls to the plateau, where thousands of miles of river navigation were
thus opened. Stations were established, and by 1884 Stanley returned armed
with four hundred and fifty "treaties" with the native chiefs, and the new
"State" appealed to the world for recognition.

The United States first recognized the "Congo Free State," which was at
last made a sovereign power under international guarantees by the Congress
of Berlin in the year 1885, and Leopold II was chosen its king. The state
had an area of about nine hundred thousand square miles, with a population
of about thirty million.

One of the first tasks before the new state was to check the Arab slave
traders. The Arabs had hitherto acted as traders and middlemen along the
upper Congo, and when the English and Congo state overthrew Mzidi, the
reigning king in the Kantanga country, a general revolt of the Arabs and
mulattoes took place. For a time, 1892-93, the whites were driven out, but
in a year or two the Arabs and their allies were subdued.

Humanity and commerce, however, did not replace the Arab slave traders.
Rather European greed and serfdom were substituted. The land was
confiscated by the state and farmed out to private Belgian corporations.
The wilder cannibal tribes were formed into a militia to prey on the
industrious, who were taxed with specific amounts of ivory and rubber, and
scourged and mutilated if they failed to pay. Harris declares that King
Leopold's regime meant the death of twelve million natives.

"Europe was staggered at the Leopoldian atrocities, and they were terrible
indeed; but what we, who were behind the scenes, felt most keenly was the
fact that the real catastrophe in the Congo was the desolation and murder
in the larger sense. The invasion of family life, the ruthless destruction
of every social barrier, the shattering of every tribal law, the
introduction of criminal practices which struck the chiefs of the people
dumb with horror--in a word, a veritable avalanche of filth and immorality
overwhelmed the Congo tribes."[29]

So notorious did the exploitation and misrule become that Leopold was
forced to take measures toward reform, and finally in 1909 the Free State
became a Belgian colony. Some reforms have been inaugurated and others may
follow, but the valley of the Congo will long stand as a monument of shame
to Christianity and European civilization.

FOOTNOTES:

[23] Quoted in Du Bois: _Timbuktu_.

[24] Von Luschan: _Verhandlungen der berliner Gesellschaft fÃ¼r
Anthropologie_, etc., 1898.

[25] Frobenius: _Voice of Africa_, Vol. I.

[26] Cf. p. 58.

[27] Keane: _Africa_, II, 117-118.

[28] _The Congo_, I, Chap. III.

[29] Harris: _Dawn in Africa_.




VI THE GREAT LAKES AND ZYMBABWE


We have already seen how a branch of the conquering Bantus turned eastward
by the Great Lakes and thus reached the sea and eventually both the Nile
and South Africa.

This brought them into the ancient and mysterious land far up the Nile,
south of Ethiopia. Here lay the ancient Punt of the Egyptians (whether we
place it in Somaliland or, as seems far more likely, around the Great
Lakes) and here, as the Egyptians thought, their civilization began. The
earliest inhabitants of the land were apparently of the Bushman or
Hottentot type of Negro. These were gradually pushed southward and
westward by the intrusion of the Nilotic Negroes. Five thousand years
before Christ the mulatto Egyptians were in the Nile valley below the
First Cataract. The Negroes were in the Nile valley down as far as the
Second Cataract and between the First and Second Cataracts were Negroes
into whose veins Semitic blood had penetrated more or less. These mixed
elements became the ancestors of the modern Somali, Gala, Bishari, and
Beja and spread Negro blood into Arabia beyond the Red Sea. The Nilotic
Negroes to the south early became great traders in ivory, gold, leopard
skins, gums, beasts, birds, and slaves, and they opened up systematic
trade between Egypt and the Great Lakes.

The result was endless movement and migration both in ancient and modern
days, which makes the cultural history of the Great Lakes region very
difficult to understand. Three great elements are, however, clear: first,
the Egyptian element, by the northward migration of the Negro ancestors of
predynastic Egypt and the southern conquests and trade of dynastic Egypt;
second, the Semitic influence from Arabia and Persia; third, the Negro
influences from western and central Africa.

The migration of the Bantu is the first clearly defined movement of modern
times. As we have shown, they began to move southward at least a thousand
years before Christ, skirting the Congo forests and wandering along the
Great Lakes and down to the Zambesi. What did they find in this land?

We do not know certainly, but from what we do know we may reconstruct the
situation in this way: the primitive culture of the Hottentots of Punt had
been further developed by them and by other stronger Negro stocks until it
reached a highly developed culture. Widespread agriculture, and mining of
gold, silver, and precious stones started a trade that penetrated to Asia
and North Africa. This may have been the source of the gold of the Ophir.

The state that thus arose became in time strongly organized; it employed
slave labor in crushing the hard quartz, sinking pits, and carrying
underground galleries; it carried out a system of irrigation and built
stone buildings and fortifications. There exists to-day many remains of
these building operations in the Kalahari desert and in northern Rhodesia.
Five hundred groups, covering over an area of one hundred and fifty
thousand square miles, lie between the Limpopo and Zambesi rivers. Mining
operations have been carried on in these plains for generations, and one
estimate is that at least three hundred and seventy-five million dollars'
worth of gold had been extracted. Some have thought that the older
workings must date back to one or even three thousand years before the
Christian era.

"There are other mines," writes De Barros in the seventeenth century,[30]
"in a district called Toroa, which is otherwise known as the kingdom of
Butua, whose ruler is a prince, by name Burrow, a vassal of Benomotapa.
This land is near the other which we said consisted of extensive plains,
and those ruins are the oldest that are known in that region. They are all
in a plain, in the middle of which stands a square fortress, all of
dressed stones within and without, well wrought and of marvelous size,
without any lime showing the joinings, the walls of which are over
twenty-five hands thick, but the height is not so great compared to the
thickness. And above the gateway of that edifice is an inscription which
some Moorish [Arab] traders who were there could not read, nor say what
writing it was. All these structures the people of this country call
Symbaoe [Zymbabwe], which with them means a court, for every place where
Benomotapa stays is so called."

Later investigation has shown that these buildings were in many cases
carefully planned and built fortifications. At Niekerk, for instance, nine
or ten hills are fortified on concentric walls thirty to fifty feet in
number, with a place for the village at the top. The buildings are forts,
miniature citadels, and also workshops and cattle kraals. Iron implements
and handsome pottery were found here, and close to the Zambesi there are
extraordinary fortifications. Farther south at Inyanga there is less
strong defense, and at Umtali there are no fortifications, showing that
builders feared invasion from the north.

These people worked in gold, silver, tin, copper, and bronze and made
beautiful pottery. There is evidence of religious significance in the
buildings, and what is called the temple was the royal residence and
served as a sort of acropolis. The surrounding residences in the valley
were evidently occupied by wealthy traders and were not fortified. Here
the gold was received from surrounding districts and bartered with
traders.

As usual there have been repeated attempts to find an external and
especially an Asiatic origin for this culture. So far, however,
archeological research seems to confirm its African origin. The
implements, weapons, and art are characteristically African and there is
no evident connection with outside sources. How far back this civilization
dates it is difficult to say, a great deal depending upon the dating of
the iron age in South Africa. If it was the same as in the Mediterranean
regions, the earliest limit was 1000 B.C.; it might, however, have been
much earlier, especially if, as seems probable, the use of iron originated
in Africa. On the other hand the culmination of this culture has been
placed by some as late as the modern middle ages.

What was it that overthrew this civilization? Undoubtedly the same sort of
raids of barbarous warriors that we have known in our day. For instance,
in 1570 there came upon the country of Mozambique, farther up the coast,
"such an inundation of pagans that they could not be numbered. They came
from that part of Monomotapa where is the great lake from which spring
these great rivers. They left no other signs of the towns they passed but
the heaps of ruins and the bones of inhabitants." So, too, it is told how
the Zimbas came, "a strange people never before seen there, who, leaving
their own country, traversed a great part of this Ethiopia like a scourge
of God, destroying every living thing they came across. They were twenty
thousand strong and marched without children or women," just as four
hundred years later the Zulu impi marched. Again in 1602 a horde of people
came from the interior called the Cabires, or cannibals. They entered the
kingdom of Monomotapa, and the reigning king, being weak, was in great
terror. Thus gradually the Monomotapa fell, and its power was scattered
until the Kaffir-Zulu raids of our day.[31]

The Arab writer, Macoudi, in the tenth century visited the East African
coast somewhere north of the equator. He found the Indian Sea at that time
frequented by Arab and Persian vessels, but there were no Asiatic
settlements on the African shore. The Bantu, or as he calls them, Zenji,
inhabited the country as far south as Sofala, where they bordered upon the
Bushmen. These Bantus were under a ruler with the dynastic title of
Waklimi. He was paramount over all the other tribes of the north and could
put three hundred thousand men in the field. They used oxen as beasts of
burden and the country produced gold in abundance, while panther skin was
largely used for clothing. Ivory was sold to Asia and the Bantu used iron
for personal adornment instead of gold or silver. They rode on their oxen,
which ran with great speed, and they ate millet and honey and the flesh of
animals.

Inland among the Bantu arose later the line of rulers called the
Monomotapa among the gifted Makalanga. Their state was very extensive,
ranging from the coast far into the interior and from Mozambique down to
the Limpopo. It was strongly organized, with feudatory allied states, and
carried on an extensive commerce by means of the traders on the coast. The
kings were converted to nominal Christianity by the Portuguese.

There are indications of trade between Nupe in West Africa and Sofala on
the east coast, and certainly trade between Asia and East Africa is
earlier than the beginning of the Christian era. The Asiatic traders
settled on the coast and by means of mulatto and Negro merchants brought
Central Africa into contact with Arabia, India, China, and Malaysia.

The coming of the Asiatics was in this wise: Zaide, great-grandson of Ali,
nephew and son-in-law of Mohammed, was banished from Arabia as a heretic.
He passed over to Africa and formed temporary settlements. His people
mingled with the blacks, and the resulting mulatto traders, known as the
Emoxaidi, seem to have wandered as far south as the equator. Soon other
Arabian families came over on account of oppression and founded the towns
of Magadosho and Brava, both not far north of the equator. The first town
became a place of importance and other settlements were made. The
Emoxaidi, whom the later immigrants regarded as heretics, were driven
inland and became the interpreting traders between the coast and the
Bantu. Some wanderers from Magadosho came into the Port of Sofala and
there learned that gold could be obtained. This led to a small Arab
settlement at that place.

Seventy years later, and about fifty years before the Norman conquest of
England, certain Persians settled at Kilwa in East Africa, led by Ali, who
had been despised in his land because he was the son of a black Abyssinian
slave mother. Kilwa, because of this, eventually became the most important
commercial station on the East African coast, and in this and all these
settlements a very large mulatto population grew up, so that very soon the
whole settlement was indistinguishable in color from the Bantu.

In 1330 Ibn Batuta visited Kilwa. He found an abundance of ivory and some
gold and heard that the inhabitants of Kilwa had gained victories over the
Zenji or Bantu. Kilwa had at that time three hundred mosques and was
"built of handsome houses of stone and lime, and very lofty, with their
windows like those of the Christians; in the same way it has streets, and
these houses have got terraces, and the wood-work is with the masonry,
with plenty of gardens, in which there are many fruit trees and much
water."[32] Kilwa after a time captured Sofala, seizing it from Magadosho.
Eventually Kilwa became mistress of the island of Zanzibar, of Mozambique,
and of much other territory. The forty-third ruler of Kilwa after Ali was
named Abraham, and he was ruling when the Portuguese arrived. The latter
reported that these people cultivated rice and cocoa, built ships, and had
considerable commerce with Asia. All the people, of whatever color, were
Mohammedans, and the richer were clothed in gorgeous robes of silk and
velvet. They traded with the inland Bantus and met numerous tribes,
receiving gold, ivory, millet, rice, cattle, poultry, and honey.

On the islands the Asiatics were independent, but on the main lands south
of Kilwa the sheiks ruled only their own people, under the overlordship of
the Bantus, to whom they were compelled to pay large tribute each year.

Vasco da Gama doubled the Cape of Good Hope in 1497 and went north on the
east coast as far as India. In the next ten years the Portuguese had
occupied more than six different points on that coast, including
Sofala.[33]

Thus civilization waxed and waned in East Africa among prehistoric
Negroes, Arab and Persian mulattoes on the coast, in the Zend or Zeng
empire of Bantu Negroes, and later in the Bantu rule of the Monomotapa.
And thus, too, among later throngs of the fiercer, warlike Bantu, the
ancient culture of the land largely died. Yet something survived, and in
the modern Bantu state, language, and industry can be found clear links
that establish the essential identity of the absorbed peoples with the
builders of Zymbabwe.

So far we have traced the history of the lands into which the southward
stream of invading Bantus turned, and have followed them to the Limpopo
River. We turn now to the lands north from Lake Nyassa.

The aboriginal Negroes sustained in prehistoric time invasions from the
northeast by Negroids of a type like the ancient Egyptians and like the
modern Gallas, Masai, and Somalis. To these migrations were added attacks
from the Nile Negroes to the north and the Bantu invaders from the south.
This has led to great differences among the groups of the population and
in their customs. Some are fierce mountaineers, occupying hilly plateaus
six thousand feet above the sea level; others, like the Wa Swahili, are
traders on the coast. There are the Masai, chocolate-colored and
frizzly-haired, organized for war and cattle lifting; and Negroids like
the Gallas, who, blending with the Bantus, have produced the race of
modern Uganda.

It was in this region that the kingdom of Kitwara was founded by the Galla
chief, Kintu. About the beginning of the nineteenth century the empire was
dismembered, the largest share falling to Uganda. The ensuing history of
Uganda is of great interest. When King Mutesa came to the throne in 1862,
he found Mohammedan influences in his land and was induced to admit
English Protestants and French Catholics. Uganda thereupon became an
extraordinary religious battlefield between these three beliefs. Mutesa's
successor, Mwanga, caused an English bishop to be killed in 1885,
believing (as has since proven quite true) that the religion he offered
would be used as a cloak for conquest. The final result was that, after
open war between the religions, Uganda was made an English protectorate in
1894.

The Negroes of Uganda are an intelligent people who had organized a
complex feudal state. At the head stood the king, and under him twelve
feudal lords. The present king, Daudi Chua, is the young grandson of
Mutesa and rules under the overlordship of England.

Many things show the connection between Egypt and this part of Africa. The
same glass beads are found in Uganda and Upper Egypt, and similar canoes
are built. Harps and other instruments bear great resemblance. Finally the
Bahima, as the Galla invaders are called, are startlingly Egyptian in
type; at the same time they are undoubtedly Negro in hair and color.
Perhaps we have here the best racial picture of what ancient Egyptian and
upper Nile regions were in predynastic times and later.

Thus in outline was seen the mission of The People--La Bantu as they
called themselves. They migrated, they settled, they tore down, and they
learned, and they in turn were often overthrown by succeeding tribes of
their own folk. They rule with their tongue and their power all Africa
south of the equator, save where the Europeans have entered. They have
never been conquered, although the gold and diamond traders have sought to
debauch them, and the ivory and rubber capitalists have cruelly wronged
their weaker groups. They are the Africans with whom the world of
to-morrow must reckon, just as the world of yesterday knew them to its
cost.

FOOTNOTES:

[30] Quoted in Bent: _Ruined Cities of Mashonaland_, pp. 203 ff.

[31] Cf. "Ethiopia Oriental," by J. Dos Santos, in Theal's _Records of
South Africa_, Vol. VII.

[32] Barbosa, quoted in Keane, II, 482.

[33] It was called Sofala, from an Arabic word, and may be associated with
the Ophir of Solomon. So, too, the river Sabi, a little off Sofala, may be
associated with the name of the Queen of Sheba, whose lineage was supposed
to be perpetuated in the powerful Monomotapa as well as the Abyssinians.




VII THE WAR OF RACES AT LAND'S END


Primitive man in Africa is found in the interior jungles and down at
Land's End in South Africa. The Pygmy people in the jungles represent
to-day a small survival from the past, but a survival of curious interest,
pushed aside by the torrent of conquest. Also pushed on by these waves of
Bantu conquest, moved the ancient Abatwa or Bushmen. They are small in
stature, yellow in color, with crisp-curled hair. The traditions of the
Bushmen say that they came southward from the regions of the Great Lakes,
and indeed the king and queen of Punt, as depicted by the Egyptians, were
Bushmen or Hottentots.

Their tribes may be divided, in accordance with their noticeable artistic
talents, into the painters and the sculptors. The sculptors entered South
Africa by moving southward through the more central portions of the
country, crossing the Zambesi, and coming down to the Cape. The painters,
on the other hand, came through Damaraland on the west coast; when they
came to the great mountain regions, they turned eastward and can be traced
as far as the mountains opposite Delagoa Bay. The mass of them settled
down in the lower part of the Cape and in the Kalahari desert. The
painters were true cave dwellers, but the sculptors lived in large
communities on the stony hills, which they marked with their carvings.

These Bushmen believed in an ancient race of people who preceded them in
South Africa. They attributed magic power to these unknown folk, and said
that some of them had been translated as stars to the sky. Before their
groups were dispersed the Bushmen had regular government. Tribes with
their chiefs occupied well-defined tracts of country and were subdivided
into branch tribes under subsidiary chiefs. The great cave represented the
dignity and glory of the entire tribe.

The Bushmen suffered most cruelly in the succeeding migrations and
conquests of South Africa. They fought desperately in self-defense; they
saw their women and children carried into bondage and they themselves
hunted like wild beasts. Both savage and civilized men appropriated their
land. Still they were brave people. "In this struggle for existence their
bitterest enemies, of whatever shade of color they might be, were forced
to make an unqualified acknowledgement of the courage and daring they so
invariably exhibited."[34]

Here, to a remote corner of the world, where, as one of their number said,
they had supposed that the only beings in the world were Bushmen and
lions, came a series of invaders. It was the outer ripples of civilization
starting far away, the indigenous and external civilizations of Africa
beating with great impulse among the Ethiopians and the Egyptian mulattoes
and Sudanese Negroes and Yorubans, and driving the Bantu race southward.
The Bantus crowded more and more upon the primitive Bushmen, and probably
a mingling of the Bushmen and the Bantus gave rise to the Hottentots.

The Hottentots, or as they called themselves, Khoi Khoin (Men of Men),
were physically a stronger race than the Abatwa and gave many evidences of
degeneration from a high culture, especially in the "phenomenal
perfection" of a language which "is so highly developed, both in its rich
phonetic system, as represented by a very delicately graduated series of
vowels and diphthongs, and in its varied grammatical structure, that
Lepsius sought for its affinities in the Egyptian at the other end of the
continent."

When South Africa was first discovered there were two distinct types of
Hottentot. The more savage Hottentots were simply large, strong Bushmen,
using weapons superior to the Bushmen, without domestic cattle or sheep.
Other tribes nearer the center of South Africa were handsomer in
appearance and raised an Egyptian breed of cattle which they rode.

In general the Hottentots were yellow, with close-curled hair, high cheek
bones, and somewhat oblique eyes. Their migration commenced about the end
of the fourteenth century and was, as is usual in such cases, a scattered,
straggling movement. The traditions of the Hottentots point to the lake
country of Central Africa as their place of origin, whence they were
driven by the Bechuana tribes of the Bantu. They fled westward to the
ocean and then turned south and came upon the Bushmen, whom they had only
partially subdued when the Dutch arrived as settlers in 1652.

The Dutch "Boers" began by purchasing land from the Hottentots and then,
as they grew more powerful, they dispossessed the dark men and tried to
enslave them. There grew up a large Dutch-Hottentot class. Indeed the
filtration of Negro blood noticeable in modern Boers accounts for much
curious history. Soon after the advent of the Dutch some of the
Hottentots, of whom there were not more than thirty or forty thousand, led
by the Korana clans, began slowly to retreat northward, followed by the
invading Dutch and fighting the Dutch, each other, and the wretched
Bushmen. In the latter part of the eighteenth century the Hottentots had
reached the great interior plain and met the on-coming outposts of the
Bantu nations.

The Bechuana, whom the Hottentots first met, were the most advanced of the
Negro tribes of Central Africa. They had crossed the Zambesi in the
fourteenth or fifteenth century; their government was a sort of feudal
system with hereditary chiefs and vassals; they were careful
agriculturists, laid out large towns with great regularity, and were the
most skilled of smiths. They used stone in building, carved on wood, and
many of them, too, were keen traders. These tribes, coming southward,
occupied the east-central part of South Africa comprising modern
Bechuanaland. Apparently they had started from the central lake country
somewhere late in the fifteenth century, and by the middle of the
eighteenth century one of their great chiefs, Tao, met the on-coming
Hottentots.

The Hottentots compelled Tao to retreat, but the mulatto Gricquas arrived
from the south, and, allying themselves with the Bechuana, stopped the
rout. The Gricquas sprang from and took their name from an old Hottentot
tribe. They were led by Kok and Barends, and by adding other elements they
became, partly through their own efforts and partly through the efforts of
the missionaries, a community of fairly well civilized people. In
Gricqualand West the mulatto Gricquas, under their chiefs Kok and
Waterboer, lived until the discovery of diamonds.

The Griquas and Bechuana tribes were thus gradually checking the
Hottentots when, in the nineteenth century, there came two new
developments: first, the English took possession of Cape Colony, and the
Dutch began to move in larger numbers toward the interior; secondly, a
newer and fiercer element of the Bantu tribes, the Zulu-Kaffirs, appeared.
The Kaffirs, or as they called themselves, the Amazosas, claimed descent
from Zuide, a great chief of the fifteenth century in the lake country.
They are among the tallest people in the world, averaging five feet ten
inches, and are slim, well-proportioned, and muscular. The more warlike
tribes were usually clothed in leopard or ox skins. Cattle formed their
chief wealth, stock breeding and hunting and fighting their main pursuits.
Mentally they were men of tact and intelligence, with a national religion
based upon ancestor worship, while their government was a patriarchal
monarchy limited by an aristocracy and almost feudal in character. The
common law which had grown up from the decisions of the chiefs made the
head of the family responsible for the conduct of its branches, a village
for all its residents, and the clan for all its villages. Finally there
was a paramount chief, who was the civil and military father of his
people. These people laid waste to the coast regions and in 1779 came in
contact with the Dutch. A series of Dutch-Kaffir wars ensued between 1779
and 1795 in which the Dutch were hard pressed.

In 1806 the English took final possession of Cape Colony. At that time
there were twenty-five thousand Boers, twenty-five thousand pure and mixed
Hottentots, and twenty-five thousand slaves secured from the east coast.
Between 1811 and 1877 there were six Kaffir-English wars. One of these in
1818 grew out of the ignorant interference of the English with the Kaffir
tribal system; then there came a terrible war between 1834 and 1835,
followed by the annexation of all the country as far as the Kei River. The
war of the Axe (1846-48) led to further annexation by the British.

Hostilities broke out again in 1856 and 1863. In the former year,
despairing of resistance to invading England, a prophet arose who advised
the wholesale destruction of all Kaffir property except weapons, in order
that this faith might bring back their dead heroes. The result was that
almost a third of the nation perished from hunger. Fresh troubles occurred
in 1877, when the Ama-Xosa confederacy was finally broken up, and to-day
gradually these tribes are passing from independence to a state of mild
vassalage to the British.

Meantime the more formidable part of the Zulu-Kaffirs had been united
under the terrible Chief Chaka. He had organized a military system, not a
new one by any means, but one of which we hear rumors back in the lake
regions in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. McDonald says, "There
has probably never been a more perfect system of discipline than that by
which Chaka ruled his army and kingdom. At a review an order might be
given in the most unexpected manner, which meant death to hundreds. If the
regiment hesitated or dared to remonstrate, so perfect was the discipline
and so great the jealousy that another was ready to cut them down. A
warrior returning from battle without his arms was put to death without
trial. A general returning unsuccessful in the main purpose of his
expedition shared the same fate. Whoever displeased the king was
immediately executed. The traditional courts practically ceased to exist
so far as the will and action of the tyrant was concerned." With this army
Chaka fell on tribe after tribe. The Bechuana fled before him and some
tribes of them were entirely destroyed. The Hottentots suffered severely
and one of his rival Zulu tribes under Umsilikatsi fled into Matabililand,
pushing back the Bechuana. By the time the English came to Port Natal,
Chaka was ruling over the whole southeastern seaboard, from the Limpopo
River to Cape Colony, including the Orange and Transvaal states and the
whole of Natal. Chaka was killed in 1828 and was eventually succeeded by
his brother Dingan, who reigned twelve years. It was during Dingan's reign
that England tried to abolish slavery in Cape Colony, but did not pay
promptly for the slaves, as she had promised; the result was the so-called
"Great Trek," about 1834, when thousands of Boers went into the interior
across the Orange and Vaal rivers.

Dingan and these Boers were soon engaged in a death struggle in which the
Zulus were repulsed and Dingan replaced by Panda. Under this chief there
was something like repose for sixteen years, but in 1856 civil war broke
out between his sons, one of whom, Cetewayo, succeeded his father in 1882.
He fell into border disputes with the English, and the result was one of
the fiercest clashes of Europe and Africa in modern days. The Zulus fought
desperately, annihilating at one time a whole detachment and killing the
young prince Napoleon. But after all it was assagais against machine guns,
and the Zulus were finally defeated at Ulundi, July 4, 1879. Thereupon
Zululand was divided among thirteen semi-independent chiefs and became a
British protectorate.

[Illustration: Ancient Kingdom of Africa]

Since then the best lands have been gradually reoccupied by a large number
of tribes--Kaffirs from the south and Zulus from the north. The tribal
organization, without being actually broken up, has been deprived of its
dangerous features by appointing paid village headmen and transforming the
hereditary chief into a British government official. In Natal there are
about one hundred and seventy tribal chiefs, and nearly half of these have
been appointed by the governor.

Umsilikatsi, who had been driven into Matabililand by the terrible Chaka
in 1828 and defeated by the Dutch in 1837, had finally reestablished his
headquarters in Rhodesia in 1838. Here he introduced the Zulu military
system and terrorized the peaceful and industrious Bechuana populations.
Lobengula succeeded Umsilikatsi in 1870 and, realizing that his power was
waning, began to retreat northward toward the Zambesi. He was finally
defeated by the British and native forces in 1893 and the land was
incorporated into South Central Africa.

The result of all these movements was to break the inhabitants of
Bechuanaland into numerous fragments. There were small numbers of mulatto
Gricquas in the southwest and similar Bastaards in the northwest. The
Hottentots and Bushmen were dispersed into groups and seem doomed to
extinction, the last Hottentot chief being deposed in 1810 and replaced by
an English magistrate. Partially civilized Hottentots still live grouped
together in their kraals and are members of Christian churches. The
Bechuana hold their own in several centers; one is in Basutoland, west of
Natal, where a number of tribes were welded together under the far-sighted
Moshesh into a modern and fairly well civilized nation. In the north part
of Bechuanaland are the self-governing Bamangwato and the Batwana, the
former ruled by Khama, one of the canniest of modern rulers in Africa.

Meantime, in Portuguese territory south of the Zambesi, there arose Gaza,
a contemporary and rival of Chaka. His son, Manikus, was deputed by
Dingan, Chaka's successor, to drive out the Portuguese. This Manikus
failed to do, and to escape vengeance he migrated north of the Limpopo.
Here he established his military kraal in a district thirty-six hundred
and fifty feet above the sea and one hundred and twenty miles inland from
Sofala. From this place his soldiery nearly succeeded in driving the
Portuguese out of East Africa. He was succeeded by his son, Umzila, and
Umzila's brother, Guzana (better known as Gungunyana), who exercised for a
time joint authority. Gungunyana was finally overthrown in November, 1895,
captured, and removed to the Azores.

[Illustration: Races in Africa]

North of the Zambesi, in British territory, the chief role in recent times
has been played by the Bechuana, the first of the Bantu to return
northward after the South African migration. Livingstone found there the
Makolo, who with other tribes had moved northward on account of the
pressure of the Dutch and Zulus below, and by conquering various tribes
in the Zambesi region had established a strong power. This kingdom was
nearly overthrown by the rebellion of the Barotse, and in 1875 the Barotse
kingdom comprised a large territory. To-day their king, Lewanika, rules
directly and indirectly fifty thousand square miles, with a population
between one and two and a half million. They are under a protectorate of
the British.

In Southwest Africa, Hottentot mulattoes crossing from the Cape caused
widespread change. They were strong men and daring fighters and soon
became dominant in what is now German Southwest Africa, where they fought
fiercely with the Bantu Ova-Hereros. Armed with fire arms, these Namakwa
Hottentots threatened Portuguese West Africa, but Germany intervened,
ostensibly to protect missionaries. By spending millions of dollars and
thousands of soldiers Germany has nearly exterminated these brave men.

Thus we have between the years 1400 and 1900 a great period of migration
up to 1750, when Bushmen, Hottentot, Bantu, and Dutch appeared in
succession at Land's End. In the latter part of the eighteenth century we
have the clash of the Hottentots and Bechuana, followed in the nineteenth
century by the terrible wars of Chaka, the Kaffirs, and Matabili. Finally,
in the latter half of the nineteenth century, we see the gradual
subjection of the Kaffir-Zulus and the Bechuana under the English and the
final conquest of the Dutch. The resulting racial problem in South Africa
is one of great intricacy.

To the racial problem has been added the tremendous problem of modern
capital brought by the discovery of gold and diamond mines, so that the
future of the Negro race is peculiarly bound up in developments here at
Land's End, where the ship of the Flying Dutchman beats back and forth on
its endless quest.

FOOTNOTES:

[34] Stowe: Native Races of South Africa, pp. 215-216.




VIII AFRICAN CULTURE


We have followed the history of mankind in Africa down the valley of the
Nile, past Ethiopia to Egypt; we have seen kingdoms arise along the great
bend of the Niger and strive with the ancient culture at its mouth. We
have seen the remnants of mankind at Land's End, the ancient culture at
Punt and Zymbabwe, and followed the invading Bantu east, south, and west
to their greatest center in the vast jungle of the Congo valleys.

We must now gather these threads together and ask what manner of men these
were and how far and in what way they progressed on the road of human
culture.

That Negro peoples were the beginners of civilization along the Ganges,
the Euphrates, and the Nile seems proven. Early Babylon was founded by a
Negroid race. Hammurabi's code, the most ancient known, says "Anna and Bel
called me, Hammurabi the exalted prince, the worshiper of the gods; to
cause justice to prevail in the land, to destroy the wicked, to prevent
the strong from oppressing the weak, to go forth like the sun over the
black-head race, to enlighten the land, and to further the welfare of the
people." The Assyrians show a distinct Negroid strain and early Egypt was
predominantly Negro. These earliest of cultures were crude and primitive,
but they represented the highest attainment of mankind after tens of
thousands of years in unawakened savagery.

It has often been assumed that the Negro is physically inferior to other
races and markedly distinguishable from them; modern science gives no
authority for such an assumption. The supposed inferiority cannot rest on
color,[35] for that is "due to the combined influences of a great number
of factors of environment working through physiological processes," and
"however marked the contrasts may be, there is no corresponding difference
in anatomical structure discoverable."[36] So, too, difference in texture
of hair is a matter of degree, not kind, and is caused by heat, moisture,
exposure, and the like.

The bony skeleton presents no distinctly racial lines of variation.
Prognathism "presents too many individual varieties to be taken as a
distinctive character of race."[37] Difference in physical measurements
does not show the Negro to be a more primitive evolutionary form.
Comparative ethnology to-day affords "no support to the view which sees in
the so-called lower races of mankind a transition stage from beast to
man."[38]

Much has been made of the supposed smaller brain of the Negro race; but
this is as yet an unproved assumption, based on the uncritical measurement
of less than a thousand Negro brains as compared with eleven thousand or
more European brains. Even if future measurement prove the average Negro
brain lighter, the vast majority of Negro brain weights fall within the
same limits as the whites; and finally, "neither size nor weight of the
brain seems to be of importance" as an index of mental capacity. We may,
therefore, say with Ratzel, "There is only one species of man. The
variations are numerous, but do not go deep."[39]

To this we may add the word of the Secretary of the First Races Congress:
"We are, then, under the necessity of concluding that an impartial
investigator would be inclined to look upon the various important peoples
of the world as to all intents and purposes essentially equal in
intellect, enterprise, morality, and physique."[40]

If these conclusions are true, we should expect to see in Africa the
human drama play itself out much as in other lands, and such has actually
been the fact. At the same time we must expect peculiarities arising from
the physiography of the land--its climate, its rainfall, its deserts, and
the peculiar inaccessibility of the coast.

Three principal zones of habitation appear: first, the steppes and deserts
around the Sahara in the north and the Kalahari desert in the south;
secondly, the grassy highlands bordering the Great Lakes and connecting
these two regions; thirdly, the forests and rivers of Central and West
Africa. In the deserts are the nomads, and the Pygmies are in the forest
fastnesses. Herdsmen and their cattle cover the steppes and highlands,
save where the tsetse fly prevents. In the open forests and grassy
highlands are the agriculturists.

Among the forest farmers the village is the center of life, while in the
open steppes political life tends to spread into larger political units.
Political integration is, however, hindered by an ease of internal
communication almost as great as the difficulty of reaching outer worlds
beyond the continent. The narrow Nile valley alone presented physical
barriers formidable enough to keep back the invading barbarians of the
south, and even then with difficulty. Elsewhere communication was all too
easy. For a while the Congo forests fended away the restless, but this
only temporarily.

On the whole Africa from the Sahara to the Cape offered no great physical
barrier to the invader, and we continually have whirlwinds of invading
hosts rushing now southward, now northward, from the interior to the coast
and from the coast inland, and hurling their force against states,
kingdoms, and cities. Some resisted for generations, some for centuries,
some but a few years. It is, then, this sudden change and the fear of it
that marks African culture, particularly in its political aspects, and
which makes it so difficult to trace this changing past. Nevertheless
beneath all change rests the strong substructure of custom, religion,
industry, and art well worth the attention of students.

Starting with agriculture, we learn that "among all the great groups of
the 'natural' races, the Negroes are the best and keenest tillers of the
ground. A minority despise agriculture and breed cattle; many combine both
occupations. Among the genuine tillers the whole life of the family is
taken up in agriculture, and hence the months are by preference called
after the operations which they demand. Constant clearings change forests
to fields, and the ground is manured with the ashes of the burnt thicket.
In the middle of the fields rise the light watch-towers, from which a
watchman scares grain-eating birds and other thieves. An African
cultivated landscape is incomplete without barns. The rapidity with which,
when newly imported, the most various forms of cultivation spread in
Africa says much for the attention which is devoted to this branch of
economy. Industries, again, which may be called agricultural, like the
preparation of meal from millet and other crops, also from cassava, the
fabrication of fermented drinks from grain, or the manufacture of cotton,
are widely known and sedulously fostered."[41]

BÃ¼cher reminds us of the deep impression made upon travelers when they
sight suddenly the well-attended fields of the natives on emerging from
the primeval forests. "In the more thickly populated parts of Africa these
fields often stretch for many a mile, and the assiduous care of the Negro
women shines in all the brighter light when we consider the insecurity of
life, the constant feuds and pillages, in which no one knows whether he
will in the end be able to harvest what he has sown. Livingstone gives
somewhere a graphic description of the devastations wrought by slave
hunts; the people were lying about slain, the dwellings were demolished;
in the fields, however, the grain was ripening and there was none to
harvest it."[42]

Sheep, goat, and chickens are domestic animals all over Africa, and Von
Franzius considers Africa the home of the house cattle and the Negro as
the original tamer. Northeastern Africa especially is noted for
agriculture, cattle raising, and fruit culture. In the eastern Sudan, and
among the great Bantu tribes extending from the Sudan down toward the
south, cattle are evidences of wealth; one tribe, for instance, having so
many oxen that each village had ten or twelve thousand head. Lenz (1884),
Bouet-Williaumez (1848), Hecquard (1854), Bosman (1805), and Baker (1868)
all bear witness to this, and Schweinfurth (1878) tells us of great cattle
parks with two to three thousand head and of numerous agricultural and
cattle-raising tribes. Von der Decken (1859-61) described the paradise of
the dwellers about Kilimanjaro--the bananas, fruit, beans and peas, cattle
raising with stall feed, the fertilizing of the fields, and irrigation.
The Negroid Gallas have seven or eight cattle to each inhabitant.
Livingstone bears witness to the busy cattle raising of the Bantus and
Kaffirs. Hulub (1881) and Chapman (1868) tell of agriculture and fruit
raising in South Africa. Shutt (1884) found the tribes in the southwestern
basin of the Congo with sheep, swine, goats, and cattle. On this
agricultural and cattle-raising economic foundation has arisen the
organized industry of the artisan, the trader, and the manufacturer.

While the Pygmies, still living in the age of wood, make no iron or stone
implements, they seem to know how to make bark cloth and fiber baskets and
simple outfits for hunting and fishing. Among the Bushmen the art of
making weapons and working in hides is quite common. The Hottentots are
further advanced in the industrial arts, being well versed in the
manufacture of clothing, weapons, and utensils. In the dressing of skins
and furs, as well as in the plaiting of cords and the weaving of mats, we
find evidences of their workmanship. In addition they are good workers in
iron and copper, using the sheepskin bellows for this purpose. The
Ashantis of the Gold Coast know how to make "cotton fabrics, turn and
glaze earthenware, forge iron, fabricate instruments and arms, embroider
rugs and carpets, and set gold and precious stones."[43] Among the people
of the banana zone we find rough basket work, coarse pottery, grass cloth,
and spoons made of wood and ivory. The people of the millet zone, because
of uncertain agricultural resources, quite generally turn to
manufacturing. Charcoal is prepared by the smiths, iron is smelted, and
numerous implements are manufactured. Among them we find axes, hatchets,
hoes, knives, nails, scythes, and other hardware. Cloaks, shoes, sandals,
shields, and water and oil vessels are made from leather which the natives
have dressed. Soap is manufactured in the Bautschi district, glass is
made, formed, and colored by the people of Nupeland, and in almost every
city cotton is spun and woven and dyed. Barth tells us that the weaving of
cotton was known in the Sudan as early as the eleventh century. There is
also extensive manufacture of wooden ware, tools, implements, and
utensils.

In describing particular tribes, Baker and Felkin tell of smiths of
wonderful adroitness, goatskins prepared better than a European tanner
could do, drinking cups and kegs of remarkable symmetry, and polished clay
floors. Schweinfurth says, "The arrow and the spear heads are of the
finest and most artistic work; their bristlelike barbs and points are
baffling when one knows how few tools these smiths have." Excellent wood
carving is found among the Bongo, Ovambo, and Makololo. Pottery and
basketry and careful hut building distinguish many tribes. Cameron (1877)
tells of villages so clean, with huts so artistic, that, save in book
knowledge, the people occupied no low plane of civilization. The Mangbettu
work both iron and copper. "The masterpieces of the Monbutto [Mangbettu]
smiths are the fine chains worn as ornaments, and which in perfection of
form and fineness compare well with our best steel chains." Shubotz in
1911 called the Mangbettu "a highly cultivated people" in architecture and
handicraft. Barth found copper exported from Central Africa in competition
with European copper at Kano.

Nor is the iron industry confined to the Sudan. About the Great Lakes and
other parts of Central Africa it is widely distributed. Thornton says,
"This iron industry proves that the East Africans stand by no means on so
low a plane of culture as many travelers would have us think. It is
unnecessary to be reminded what a people without instruction, and with the
rudest tools to do such skilled work, could do if furnished with steel
tools." Arrows made east of Lake Nyanza were found to be nearly as good as
the best Swedish iron in Birmingham. From Egypt to the Cape, Livingstone
assures us that the mortar and pestle, the long-handled axe, the goatskin
bellows, etc., have the same form, size, etc., pointing to a migration
southwestward. Holub (1879), on the Zambesi, found fine workers in iron
and bronze. The Bantu huts contain spoons, wooden dishes, milk pails,
calabashes, handmills, and axes.

Kaffirs and Zulus, in the extreme south, are good smiths, and the latter
melt copper and tin together and draw wire from it, according to Kranz
(1880). West of the Great Lakes, Stanley (1878) found wonderful examples
of smith work: figures worked out of brass and much work in copper.
Cameron (1878) saw vases made near Lake Tanganyika which reminded him of
the amphorae in the Villa of Diomedes, Pompeii. Horn (1882) praises tribes
here for iron and copper work. Livingstone (1871) passed thirty smelting
houses in one journey, and Cameron came across bellows with valves, and
tribes who used knives in eating. He found tribes which no Europeans had
ever visited, who made ingots of copper in the form of the St. Andrew's
cross, which circulated even to the coast. In the southern Congo basin
iron and copper are worked; also wood and ivory carving and pottery making
are pursued. In equatorial West Africa, Lenz and Du Chaillu (1861) found
iron workers with charcoal, and also carvers of bone and ivory. Near Cape
Lopez, HÃ¼bbe-Schleiden found tribes making ivory needles inlaid with
ebony, while the arms and dishes of the Osaka are found among many tribes
even as far as the Atlantic Ocean. Wilson (1856) found natives in West
Africa who could repair American watches.

Gold Coast Negroes make gold rings and chains, forming the metal into all
kinds of forms. Soyaux says, "The works in relief which natives of Lower
Guinea carve with their own knives out of ivory and hippopotamus teeth are
really entitled to be called works of art, and many wooden figures of
fetishes in the Ethnographical Museum of Berlin show some understanding of
the proportions of the human body." Great Bassam is called by Hecquard the
"Fatherland of Smiths." The Mandingo in the northwest are remarkable
workers in iron, silver, and gold, we are told by Mungo Park (1800), while
there is a mass of testimony as to the work in the north-west of Africa in
gold, tin, weaving, and dyeing. Caille found the Negroes in Bambana
manufacturing gunpowder (1824-28), and the Hausa make soap; so, too,
Negroes in Uganda and other parts have made guns after seeing European
models.

So marked has been the work of Negro artisans and traders in the
manufacture and exchange of iron implements that a growing number of
archeologists are disposed to-day to consider the Negro as the originator
of the art of smelting iron. Gabriel de Mortillet (1883) declared Negroes
the only iron users among primitive people. Some would, therefore, argue
that the Negro learned it from other folk, but Andree declares that the
Negro developed his own "Iron Kingdom." Schweinfurth, Von Luschan, Boaz,
and others incline to the belief that the Negroes invented the smelting of
iron and passed it on to the Egyptians and to modern Europe.

Boaz says, "It seems likely that at a time when the European was still
satisfied with rude stone tools, the African had invented or adopted the
art of smelting iron. Consider for a moment what this invention has meant
for the advance of the human race. As long as the hammer, knife, saw,
drill, the spade, and the hoe had to be chipped out of stone, or had to be
made of shell or hard wood, effective industrial work was not impossible,
but difficult. A great progress was made when copper found in large
nuggets was hammered out into tools and later on shaped by melting, and
when bronze was introduced; but the true advancement of industrial life
did not begin until the hard iron was discovered. It seems not unlikely
that the people who made the marvelous discovery of reducing iron ores by
smelting were the African Negroes. Neither ancient Europe, nor ancient
western Asia, nor ancient China knew the iron, and everything points to
its introduction from Africa. At the time of the great African discoveries
toward the end of the past century, the trade of the blacksmith was found
all over Africa, from north to south and from east to west. With his
simple bellows and a charcoal fire he reduced the ore that is found in
many parts of the continent and forged implements of great usefulness and
beauty."[44]

Torday has argued recently, "I feel convinced by certain arguments that
seem to prove to my satisfaction that we are indebted to the Negro for the
very keystone of our modern civilization and that we owe him the discovery
of iron. That iron could be discovered by accident in Africa seems beyond
doubt: if this is so in other parts of the world, I am not competent to
say. I will only remind you that Schweinfurth and Petherick record the
fact that in the northern part of East Africa smelting furnaces are worked
without artificial air current and, on the other hand, Stuhlmann and
Kollmann found near Victoria Nyanza that the natives simply mixed powdered
ore with charcoal and by introduction of air currents obtained the metal.
These simple processes make it simple that iron should have been
discovered in East or Central Africa. No bronze implements have ever been
found in black Africa; had the Africans received iron from the Egyptians,
bronze would have preceded this metal and all traces of it would not have
disappeared. Black Africa was for a long time an exporter of iron, and
even in the twelfth century exports to India and Java are recorded by
Idrisi.

"It is difficult to imagine that Egypt should have obtained it from
Europe where the oldest find (in Hallstadt) cannot be of an earlier period
than 800 B.C., or from Asia, where iron is not known before 1000 B.C., and
where, in the times of Ashur Nazir Pal, it was still used concurrently
with bronze, while iron beads have been only recently discovered by
Messrs. G.A. Wainwright and Bushe Fox in a predynastic grave, and where a
piece of this metal, possibly a tool, was found in the masonry of the
great pyramid."[45]

The Negro is a born trader. Lenz says, "our sharpest European merchants,
even Jews and Armenians, can learn much of the cunning and trade of the
Negroes." We know that the trade between Central Africa and Egypt was in
the hands of Negroes for thousands of years, and in early days the cities
of the Sudan and North Africa grew rich through Negro trade.

Leo Africanus, writing of Timbuktu in the sixteenth century, said, "It is
a wonder to see what plentie of Merchandize is daily brought hither and
how costly and sumptuous all things be.... Here are many shops of
artificers and merchants and especially of such as weave linnen and
cloth."

Long before cotton weaving was a British industry, West Africa and the
Sudan were supplying a large part of the world with cotton cloth. Even
to-day cities like Kuka on the west shore of Lake Chad and Sokota are
manufacturing centers where cotton is spun and woven, skins tanned,
implements and iron ornaments made.

"Travelers," says BÃ¼cher, "have often observed this tribal or local
development of industrial technique. 'The native villages,' relates a
Belgian observer of the Lower Congo, 'are often situated in groups. Their
activities are based upon reciprocality, and they are to a certain extent
the complements of one another. Each group has its more or less strongly
defined specialty. One carries on fishing; another produces palm wine; a
third devotes itself to trade and is broker for the others, supplying the
community with all products from outside; another has reserved to itself
work in iron and copper, making weapons for war and hunting, various
utensils, etc. None may, however, pass beyond the sphere of its own
specialty without exposing itself to the risk of being universally
proscribed.'"

From the Loango Coast, Bastian tells of a great number of centers for
special products of domestic industry. "Loango excels in mats and fishing
baskets, while the carving of elephants' tusks is specially followed in
Chilungo. The so-called Mafooka hats with raised patterns are drawn
chiefly from the bordering country of Kakongo and Mayyume. In Bakunya are
made potter's wares, which are in great demand; in Basanza, excellent
swords; in Basundi, especially beautiful ornamented copper rings; on the
Congo, clever wood and tablet carvings; in Loango, ornamented clothes and
intricately designed mats; in Mayumbe, clothing of finely woven mat-work;
in Kakongo, embroidered hats and also burnt clay pitchers; and among the
Bayakas and Mantetjes, stuffs of woven grass."[46]

A native Negro student tells of the development of trade among the
Ashanti. "It was a part of the state system of Ashanti to encourage trade.
The king once in every forty days, at the Adai custom, distributed among a
number of chiefs various sums of gold dust with a charge to turn the same
to good account. These chiefs then sent down to the coast caravans of
tradesmen, some of whom would be their slaves, sometimes some two or three
hundred strong, to barter ivory for European goods, or buy such goods with
gold dust, which the king obtained from the royal alluvial workings. Down
to 1873 a constant stream of Ashanti traders might be seen daily wending
their way to the merchants of the coast and back again, yielding more
certain wealth and prosperity to the merchants of the Gold Coast and Great
Britain than may be expected for some time yet to come from the mining
industry and railway development put together. The trade chiefs would, in
due time, render a faithful account to the king's stewards, being allowed
to retain a fair portion of the profit. In the king's household, too, he
would have special men who directly traded for him. Important chiefs
carried on the same system of trading with the coast as did the king. Thus
every member of the state, from the king downward, took an active interest
in the promotion of trade and in the keeping open of trade routes into the
interior."[47]

The trade thus encouraged and carried on in various parts of West Africa
reached wide areas. From the Fish River to Kuka, and from Lagos to
Zanzibar, the markets have become great centers of trade, the leading
implement to civilization. Permanent markets are found in places like
Ujiji and Nyangwe, where everything can be bought and sold from
earthenware to wives; from the one to three thousand traders flocked here.

"How like is the market traffic, with all its uproar and sound of human
voices, to one of our own markets! There is the same rivalry in praising
the goods, the violent, brisk movements, the expressive gesture, the
inquiring, searching glance, the changing looks of depreciation or
triumph, of apprehension, delight, approbation. So says Stanley. Trade
customs are not everywhere alike. If when negotiating with the Bangalas of
Angola you do not quickly give them what they want, they go away and do
not come back. Then perhaps they try to get possession of the coveted
object by means of theft. It is otherwise with the Songos and Kiokos, who
let you deal with them in the usual way. To buy even a small article you
must go to the market; people avoid trading anywhere else. If a man says
to another; 'Sell me this hen' or 'that fruit,' the answer as a rule will
be, 'Come to the market place.' The crowd gives confidence to individuals,
and the inviolability of the visitor to the market, and of the market
itself, looks like an idea of justice consecrated by long practice. Does
not this remind us of the old Germanic 'market place'?"[48]

Turning now to Negro family and social life we find, as among all
primitive peoples, polygamy and marriage by actual or simulated purchase.
Out of the family develops the typical African village organization, which
is thus described in Ashanti by a native Gold Coast writer: "The headman,
as his name implies, is the head of a village community, a ward in a
township, or of a family. His position is important, inasmuch as he has
directly to deal with the composite elements of the general bulk of the
people.

"It is the duty of the head of a family to bring up the members thereof in
the way they should go; and by 'family' you must understand the entire
lineal descendants of a materfamilias, if I may coin a convenient phrase.
It is expected of him by the state to bring up his charge in the knowledge
of matters political and traditional. It is his work to train up his wards
in the ways of loyalty and obedience to the powers that be. He is held
responsible for the freaks of recalcitrant members of his family, and he
is looked to to keep them within bounds and to insist upon conformity of
their party with the customs, laws, and traditional observances of the
community. In early times he could send off to exile by sale a troublesome
relative who would not observe the laws of the community.

"It is a difficult task that he is set to, but in this matter he has
all-powerful helpers in the female members of the family, who will be
either the aunts, or the sisters, or the cousins, or the nieces of the
headman; and as their interests are identical with his in every
particular, the good women spontaneously train up their children to
implicit obedience to the headman, whose rule in the family thus becomes a
simple and an easy matter. 'The hand that rocks the cradle rules the
world.' What a power for good in the native state system would the mothers
of the Gold Coast and Ashanti become by judicious training upon native
lines!

"The headman is par excellence the judge of his family or ward. Not only
is he called upon to settle domestic squabbles, but frequently he sits
judge over more serious matters arising between one member of the ward and
another; and where he is a man of ability and influence, men from other
wards bring him their disputes to settle. When he so settles disputes, he
is entitled to a hearing fee, which, however, is not so much as would be
payable in the regular court of the king or chief.

"The headman is naturally an important member of his company and often is
a captain thereof. When he combines the two offices of headman and
captain, he renders to the community a very important service. For in
times of war, where the members of the ward would not serve cordially
under a stranger, they would in all cases face any danger with their own
kinsman as their leader. The headman is always succeeded by his uterine
brother, cousin, or nephew--the line of succession, that is to say,
following the customary law."[49]

We may contrast this picture with the more warlike Bantus of Southeast
Africa. Each tribe lived by itself in a town with from five to fifteen
thousand inhabitants, surrounded by gardens of millet, beans, and
watermelon. Beyond these roamed their cattle, sheep, and goats. Their
religion was ancestor worship with sacrifice to spirits and the dead, and
some of the tribes made mummies of the corpses and clothed them for
burial. They wove cloth of cotton and bark, they carved wood and built
walls of unhewn stone. They had a standing military organization, and the
tribes had their various totems, so that they were known as the Men of
Iron, the Men of the Sun, the Men of the Serpents, Sons of the Corn
Cleaners, and the like. Their system of common law was well conceived and
there were organized tribunals of justice. In difficult cases precedents
were sought and learned antiquaries consulted. At the age of fifteen or
sixteen the boys were circumcised and formed into guilds. The land was
owned by the tribe and apportioned to the chief by each family, and the
main wealth of the tribe was in its cattle.

In general, among the African clans the idea of private property was but
imperfectly developed and never included land. The main mass of visible
wealth belonged to the family and clan rather than to the individual; only
in the matter of weapons and ornaments was exclusive private ownership
generally recognized.

The government, vested in fathers and chiefs, varied in different tribes
from absolute despotisms to limited monarchies, almost republican. Viewing
the Basuto National Assembly in South Africa, Lord Bryce recently wrote,
"The resemblance to the primary assemblies of the early peoples of Europe
is close enough to add another to the arguments which discredit the theory
that there is any such thing as an Aryan type of institutions."[50]

While women are sold into marriage throughout Africa, nevertheless their
status is far removed from slavery. In the first place the tracing of
relationships through the female line, which is all but universal in
Africa, gives the mother great influence. Parental affection is very
strong, and throughout Negro Africa the mother is the most influential
councilor, even in cases of tyrants like Chaka or Mutesa.

"No mother can love more tenderly or be more deeply beloved than the Negro
mother. Robin tells of a slave in Martinique who, with his savings, freed
his mother instead of himself. 'Everywhere in Africa,' writes Mungo Park,
'I have noticed that no greater affront can be offered a Negro than
insulting his mother. 'Strike me,' cried a Mandingo to his enemy, 'but
revile not my mother!' ... The Herero swears 'By my mother's tears!'.. The
Angola Negroes have a saying, 'As a mist lingers on the swamps, so lingers
the love of father and mother.'"[51]

Black queens have often ruled African tribes. Among the Ba-Lolo, we are
told, women take part in public assemblies where all-important questions
are discussed. The system of educating children among such tribes as the
Yoruba is worthy of emulation by many more civilized peoples.

Close knit with the family and social organization comes the religious
life of the Negro. The religion of Africa is the universal animism or
fetishism of primitive peoples, rising to polytheism and approaching
monotheism chiefly, but not wholly, as a result of Christian and Islamic
missions. Of fetishism there is much misapprehension. It is not mere
senseless degradation. It is a philosophy of life. Among primitive Negroes
there can be, as Miss Kingsley reminds us, no such divorce of religion
from practical life as is common in civilized lands. Religion is life, and
fetish an expression of the practical recognition of dominant forces in
which the Negro lives. To him all the world is spirit. Miss Kingsley says,
"If you want, for example, to understand the position of man in nature
according to fetish, there is, as far as I know, no clearer statement of
it made than is made by Goethe in his superb 'Prometheus.'"[52] Fetish is
a severely logical way of accounting for the world in terms of good and
malignant spirits.

"It is this power of being able logically to account for everything that
is, I believe, at the back of the tremendous permanency of fetish in
Africa, and the cause of many of the relapses into it by Africans
converted to other religions; it is also the explanation of the fact that
white men who live in the districts where death and danger are everyday
affairs, under a grim pall of boredom, are liable to believe in fetish,
though ashamed of so doing. For the African, whose mind has been soaked in
fetish during his early and most impressionable years, the voice of fetish
is almost irresistible when affliction comes to him."[53]

Ellis tells us of the spirit belief of the Ewe people, who believe that
men and all nature have the indwelling "Kra," which is immortal; that the
man himself after death may exist as a ghost, which is often conceived of
as departed from the "Kra," a shadowy continuing of the man. Bryce,
speaking of the Kaffirs of South Africa, says, "To the Kaffirs, as to the
most savage races, the world was full of spirits--spirits of the rivers,
the mountains, and the woods. Most important were the ghosts of the dead,
who had power to injure or help the living, and who were, therefore,
propitiated by offerings at stated periods, as well as on occasions when
their aid was especially desired. This kind of worship, the worship once
most generally diffused throughout the world, and which held its ground
among the Greeks and Italians in the most flourishing period of ancient
civilization, as it does in China and Japan to-day, was, and is, virtually
the religion of the Kaffirs."[54]

African religion does not, however, stop with fetish, but, as in the case
of other peoples, tends toward polytheism and monotheism. Among the
Yoruba, for instance, Frobenius shows that religion and city-state go hand
in hand.

"The first experienced glance will here detect the fact that this nation
originally possessed a clear and definite organization so duly ordered and
so logical that we but seldom meet with its like among all the peoples of
the earth. And the basic idea of every clan's progeniture is a powerful
God; the legitimate order in which the descendants of a particular clan
unite in marriage to found new families, the essential origin of every
new-born babe's descent in the founder of its race and its consideration
as a part of the God in Chief; the security with which the newly wedded
wife not only may, but should, minister to her own God in an unfamiliar
home."[55]

The Yoruba have a legend of a dying divinity. "This people ... give
evidence of a generalized system; a theocratic scheme, a well-conceived
perceptible organization, reared in rhythmically proportioned manner."

Miss Kingsley says, "The African has a great Over God."[56] Nassau, the
missionary, declares, "After more than forty years' residence among these
tribes, fluently using their language, conversant with their customs,
dwelling intimately in their huts, associating with them in the various
relations of teacher, pastor, friend, master, fellow-traveler, and guest,
and in my special office as missionary, searching after their religious
thought (and therefore being allowed a deeper entrance into the arcana of
their soul than would be accorded to a passing explorer), I am able
unhesitatingly to say that among all the multitude of degraded ones with
whom I have met, I have seen or heard of none whose religious thought was
only a superstition.

"Standing in the village street, surrounded by a company whom their chief
has courteously summoned at my request, when I say to him, 'I have come to
speak to your people,' I do not need to begin by telling them that there
is a God. Looking on that motley assemblage of villagers,--the bold, gaunt
cannibal with his armament of gun, spear, and dagger; the artisan with
rude adze in hand, or hands soiled at the antique bellows of the village
smithy; women who have hasted from their kitchen fire with hands white
with the manioc dough or still grasping the partly scaled fish; and
children checked in their play with tiny bow and arrow or startled from
their dusty street pursuit of dog or goat,--I have yet to be asked, 'Who
is God?'"[57]

The basis of Egyptian religion was "of a purely Nigritian character,"[58]
and in its developed form Sudanese tribal gods were invoked and venerated
by the priests. In Upper Egypt, near the confines of Ethiopia, paintings
repeatedly represent black priests conferring on red Egyptian priests the
instruments and symbols of priesthood. In the Sudan to-day Frobenius
distinguishes four principal religions: first, earthly ancestor worship;
next, the social cosmogony of the Atlantic races; third, the religion of
the Bori, and fourth, Islam. The Bori religion spreads from Nubia as far
as the Hausa, and from Lake Chad in the Niger as far as the Yoruba. It is
the religion of possession and has been connected by some with Asiatic
influences.

From without have come two great religious influences, Islam and
Christianity. Islam came by conquest, trade, and proselytism. As a
conqueror it reached Egypt in the seventh century and had by the end of
the fourteenth century firm footing in the Egyptian Sudan. It overran the
central Sudan by the close of the seventeenth century, and at the
beginning of the nineteenth century had swept over Senegambia and the
whole valley of the Niger down to the Gulf of Guinea. On the east Islam
approached as a trader in the eighth century; it spread into Somaliland
and overran Nubia in the fourteenth century. To-day Islam dominates Africa
north of ten degrees north latitude and is strong between five and ten
degrees north latitude. In the east it reaches below the Victoria Nyanza.

Christianity early entered Africa; indeed, as Mommsen says, "It was
through Africa that Christianity became the religion of the world.
Tertullian and Cyprian were from Carthage, Arnobius from Sicca Veneria,
Lactantius, and probably in like manner Minucius Felix, in spite of their
Latin names, were natives of Africa, and not less so Augustine. In Africa
the Church found its most zealous confessors of the faith and its most
gifted defenders."[59]

The Africa referred to here, however, was not Negroland, but Africa above
the desert, where Negro blood was represented in the ancient Mediterranean
race and by intercourse across the desert. On the other hand Christianity
was early represented in the valley of the Nile under "the most holy pope
and patriarch of the great city of Alexandria and of all of the land of
Egypt, of Jerusalem, the holy city, of Nubia, Abyssinia, and Pentapolis,
and all the preaching of St. Mark." This patriarchate had a hundred
bishoprics in the fourth century and included thousands of black
Christians. Through it the Cross preceded the Crescent in some of the
remotest parts of black Africa.

All these beginnings were gradually overthrown by Islam except among the
Copts in Egypt, and in Abyssinia. The Portuguese in the sixteenth century
began to replant the Christian religion and for a while had great success,
both on the east and west coasts. Roman Catholic enterprise halted in the
eighteenth century and the Protestants began. To-day the west coast is
studded with English and German missions, South Africa is largely
Christian through French and English influence, and the region about the
Great Lakes is becoming christianized. The Roman Catholics have lately
increased their activities, and above all the Negroes of America have
entered with their own churches and with the curiously significant
"Ethiopian" movement.

Coming now to other spiritual aspects of African culture, we can speak at
present only in a fragmentary way. Roughly speaking, Africa can be divided
into two language zones: north of the fifth degree of north latitude is
the zone of diversity, with at least a hundred groups of widely divergent
languages; south of the line there is one minor language
(Bushman-Hottentot), spoken by less than fifty thousand people, and
elsewhere the predominant Bantu tongue with its various dialects, spoken
by at least fifty million. The Bantu tongue, which thus rules all Central,
West, and South Africa, is an agglutinative tongue which makes especial
use of prefixes. The hundreds of Negro tongues or dialects in the north
represent most probably the result of war and migration and the breaking
up of ancient centers of culture. In Abyssinia and the great horn of East
Africa the influence of Semitic tongues is noted. Despite much effort on
the part of students, it has been impossible to show any Asiatic origin
for the Egyptian language. As Sergi maintains, "everything favors an
African origin."[60] The most brilliant suggestion of modern days links
together the Egyptian of North Africa and the Hottentot and Bushmen
tongues of South Africa.

Language was reduced to writing among the Egyptians and Ethiopians and to
some extent elsewhere in Africa. Over 100 manuscripts of Ethiopian and
Ethiopic-Arabian literature are extant, including a version of the Bible
and historical chronicles. The Arabic was used as the written tongue of
the Sudan, and Negroland has given us in this tongue many chronicles and
other works of black authors. The greatest of these, the Epic of the Sudan
(Tarikh-es-Soudan), deserves to be placed among the classics of all
literature. In other parts of Africa there was no written language, but
there was, on the other hand, an unusual perfection of oral tradition
through bards, and extraordinary efficiency in telegraphy by drum and
horn.

The folklore and proverbs of the African tribes are exceedingly rich. Some
of these have been made familiar to English writers through the work of
"Uncle Remus." Others have been collected by Johnston, Ellis, and Theal.

A black bard of our own day has described the onslaught of the Matabili in
poetry of singular force and beauty:

  They saw the clouds ascend from the plains:
  It was the smoke of burning towns.
    The confusion of the whirlwind
Was in the heart of the great chief of the blue-colored cattle.
      The shout was raised,
        "They are friends!"
      But they shouted again,
        "They are foes!"
Till their near approach proclaimed them Matabili.
      The men seized their arms,
And rushed out as if to chase the antelope.
    The onset was as the voice of lightning,
And their javelins as the shaking of the forest in the autumn storm.[61]

There can be no doubt of the Negro's deep and delicate sense of beauty in
form, color, and sound. Soyaux says of African industry, "Whoever denies
to them independent invention and individual taste in their work either
shuts his eyes intentionally before perfectly evident facts, or lack of
knowledge renders him an incompetent judge."[62] M. Rutot had lately told
us how the Negro race brought art and sculpture to pre-historic Europe.
The bones of the European Negroids are almost without exception found in
company with drawings and sculpture in high and low relief; some of their
sculptures, like the Wellendorff "Venus," are unusually well finished for
primitive man. So, too, the painting and carving of the Bushmen and their
forerunners in South Africa has drawn the admiration of students. The
Negro has been prolific in the invention of musical instruments and has
given a new and original music to the western world.

Schweinfurth, who has preserved for us much of the industrial art of the
Negroes, speaks of their delight in the production of works of art for the
embellishment and convenience of life. Frobenius expressed his
astonishment at the originality of the African in the Yoruba temple which
he visited. "The lofty veranda was divided from the passageway by
fantastically carved and colored pillars. On the pillars were sculptured
knights, men climbing trees, women, gods, and mythical beings. The dark
chamber lying beyond showed a splendid red room with stone hatchets,
wooden figures, cowry beads, and jars. The whole picture, the columns
carved in colors in front of the colored altar, the old man sitting in the
circle of those who reverenced him, the open scaffolding of ninety
rafters, made a magnificent impression."[63]

The Germans have found, in Kamarun, towns built, castellated, and
fortified in a manner that reminds one of the prehistoric cities of Crete.
The buildings and fortifications of Zymbabwe have already been described
and something has been said of the art of Benin, with its brass and bronze
and ivory. All the work of Benin in bronze and brass was executed by
casting, and by methods so complicated that it would be no easy task for a
modern European craftsman to imitate them.

Perhaps no race has shown in its earlier development a more magnificent
art impulse than the Negro, and the student must not forget how far Negro
genius entered into the art in the valley of the Nile from Meroe and
Nepata down to the great temples of Egypt.

Frobenius has recently directed the world's attention to art in West
Africa. Quartz and granite he found treated with great dexterity. But more
magnificent than the stone monument is the proof that at some remote era
glass was made and molded in Yorubaland and that the people here were
brilliant in the production of terra-cotta images. The great mass of
potsherds, lumps of glass, heaps of slag, etc., "proves, at all events,
that the glass industry flourished in this locality in ages past. It is
plain that the glass beads found to have been so very common in Africa
were not only not imported, but were actually manufactured in great
quantities at home."

The terra-cotta pieces are "remains of another ancient and fine type of
art" and were "eloquent of a symmetry, a vitality, a delicacy of form, and
practically a reminiscence of the ancient Greeks." The antique bronze head
Frobenius describes as "a head of marvelous beauty, wonderfully cast," and
"almost equal in beauty and, at least, no less noble in form, and as
ancient as the terra-cotta heads."[64]

In a park of monuments Frobenius saw the celebrated forge and hammer: a
mighty mass of iron, like a falling drop in shape, and a block of quartz
fashioned like a drum. Frobenius thinks these were relics dating from past
ages of culture, when the manipulation of quartz and granite was
thoroughly understood and when iron manipulation gave evidence of a skill
not met with to-day.

Even when we contemplate such revolting survivals of savagery as
cannibalism we cannot jump too quickly at conclusions. Cannibalism is
spread over many parts of Negro Africa, yet the very tribes who practice
cannibalism show often other traits of industry and power. "These cannibal
Bassonga were, according to the types we met with, one of those rare
nations of the African interior which can be classed with the most
esthetic and skilled, most discreet and intelligent of all those generally
known to us as the so-called natural races. Before the Arabic and European
invasion they did not dwell in 'hamlets,' but in towns with twenty or
thirty thousand inhabitants, in towns whose highways were shaded by
avenues of splendid palms planted at regular intervals and laid out with
the symmetry of colonnades. Their pottery would be fertile in suggestion
to every art craftsman in Europe. Their weapons of iron were so perfectly
fashioned that no industrial art from abroad could improve upon their
workmanship. The iron blades were cunningly ornamented with damascened
copper, and the hilts artistically inlaid with the same metal. Moreover,
they were most industrious and capable husbandmen, whose careful tillage
of the suburbs made them able competitors of any gardener in Europe. Their
sexual and parental relations evidenced an amount of tact and delicacy of
feelings unsurpassed among ourselves, either in the simplicity of the
country or the refinements of the town. Originally their political and
municipal system was organized on the lines of a representative republic.
True, it is on record that these well-governed towns often waged an
internecine warfare; but in spite of this it had been their invariable
custom from time immemorial, even in times of strife, to keep the trade
routes open and to allow their own and foreign merchants to go their ways
unharmed. And the commerce of these nations ebbed and flowed along a road
of unknown age, running from Itimbiri to Batubenge, about six hundred
miles in length. This highway was destroyed by the 'missionaries of
civilization' from Arabia only toward the close of the eighteenth century.
But even in my own time there were still smiths who knew the names of
places along that wonderful trade route driven through the heart of the
'impenetrable forests of the Congo.' For every scrap of imported iron was
carried over it."[65]

In disposition the Negro is among the most lovable of men. Practically all
the great travelers who have spent any considerable time in Africa testify
to this and pay deep tribute to the kindness with which they were
received. One has but to remember the classic story of Mungo Park, the
strong expressions of Livingstone, the words of Stanley and hundreds of
others to realize this.

Ceremony and courtesy mark Negro life. Livingstone again and again reminds
us of "true African dignity." "When Ilifian men or women salute each
other, be it with a plain and easy curtsey (which is here the simplest
form adopted), or kneeling down, or throwing oneself upon the ground, or
kissing the dust with one's forehead, no matter which, there is yet a
deliberateness, a majesty, a dignity, a devoted earnestness in the manner
of its doing, which brings to light with every gesture, with every fold of
clothing, the deep significance and essential import of every single
action. Everyone may, without too greatly straining his attention, notice
the very striking precision and weight with which the upper and lower
native classes observe these niceties of intercourse."[66]

All this does not mean that the African Negro is not human with the
all-too-well-known foibles of humanity. Primitive life among them is,
after all, as bare and cruel as among primitive Germans or Chinese, but it
is not more so, and the more we study the Negro the more we realize that
we are dealing with a normal human stock which under reasonable conditions
has developed and will develop in the same lines as other men. Why is it,
then, that so much of misinformation and contempt is widespread concerning
Africa and its people, not simply among the unthinking mass, but among men
of education and knowledge?

One reason lies undoubtedly in the connotation of the term "Negro." In
North America a Negro may be seven-eights white, since the term refers to
any person of Negro descent. If we use the term in the same sense
concerning the inhabitants of the rest of world, we may say truthfully
that Negroes have been among the leaders of civilization in every age of
the world's history from ancient Babylon to modern America; that they have
contributed wonderful gifts in art, industry, political organization, and
religion, and that they are doing the same to-day in all parts of the
world.

In sharp contrast to this usage the term "Negro" in Africa has been more
and more restricted until some scientists, late in the last century,
declared that the great mass of the black and brown people of Africa were
not Negroes at all, and that the "real" Negro dwells in a small space
between the Niger and the Senegal. Ratzel says, "If we ask what justifies
so narrow a limitation, we find that the hideous Negro type, which the
fancy of observers once saw all over Africa, but which, as Livingstone
says, is really to be seen only as a sign in front of tobacco shops, has
on closer inspection evaporated from all parts of Africa, to settle no one
knows how in just this region. If we understand that an extreme case may
have been taken for the genuine and pure form, even so we do not
comprehend the ground of its geographical limitation and location; for
wherever dark, woolly-haired men dwell, this ugly type also crops up. We
are here in the presence of a refinement of science which to an
unprejudiced eye will hardly hold water."[67]

In this restricted sense the Negro has no history, culture, or ability,
for the simple fact that such human beings as have history and evidence
culture and ability are not Negroes! Between these two extreme
definitions, with unconscious adroitness, the most extraordinary and
contradictory conclusions have been reached.

Let it therefore be said, once for all, that racial inferiority is not the
cause of anti-Negro prejudice. Boaz, the anthropologist, says, "An
unbiased estimate of the anthropological evidence so far brought forward
does not permit us to countenance the belief in a racial inferiority which
would unfit an individual of the Negro race to take his part in modern
civilization. We do not know of any demand made on the human body or mind
in modern life that anatomical or ethnological evidence would prove to be
beyond the powers of the Negro."[68]

"We have every reason to suppose that all races are capable, under proper
guidance, of being fitted into the complex scheme of our modern
civilization, and the policy of artificially excluding them from its
benefits is as unjustifiable scientifically as it is ethically
abhorrent."[69] What is, then, this so-called "instinctive" modern
prejudice against black folk?

Lord Bryce says of the intermingling of blacks and whites in South
America, "The ease with which the Spaniards have intermingled by marriage
with the Indian tribes--and the Portuguese have done the like, not only
with the Indians, but with the more physically dissimilar Negroes--shows
that race repugnance is no such constant and permanent factor in human
affairs as members of the Teutonic peoples are apt to assume. Instead of
being, as we Teutons suppose, the rule in the matter, we are rather the
exception, for in the ancient world there seems to have been little race
repulsion."

In nearly every age and land men of Negro descent have distinguished
themselves. In literature there is Terence in Rome, Nosseyeb and Antar in
Arabia, Es-Sa'di in the Sudan, Pushkin in Russia, Dumas in France, Al
Kanemi in Spain, Heredia in the West Indies, and Dunbar in the United
States, not to mention the alleged Negro strain in Ãsop and Robert
Browning. As rulers and warriors we remember such Negroes as Queen
Nefertari and Amenhotep III among many others in Egypt; Candace and
Ergamenes in Ethiopia; Mansa Musa, Sonni Ali, and Mohammed Askai in the
Sudan; Diaz in Brazil, Toussaint L'Ouverture in Hayti, Hannivalov in
Russia, Sakanouye Tamuramaro in Japan, the elder Dumas in France, Cazembe
and Chaka among the Bantu, and Menelik, of Abyssinia; the numberless black
leaders of India, and the mulatto strain of Alexander Hamilton. In music
and art we recall Bridgewater, the friend of Beethoven, and the
unexplained complexion of Beethoven's own father; Coleridge-Taylor in
England, Tanner in America, Gomez in Spain; Ira Aldridge, the actor, and
Johnson, Cook, and Burleigh, who are making the new American syncopated
music. In the Church we know that Negro blood coursed in the veins of many
of the Catholic African fathers, if not in certain of the popes; and there
were in modern days Benoit of Palermo, St. Benedict, Bishop Crowther, the
Mahdi who drove England from the Sudan, and Americans like Allen, Lot
Carey, and Alexander Crummell. In science, discovery, and invention the
Negroes claim Lislet Geoffroy of the French Academy, Latino and Amo, well
known in European university circles; and in America the explorers
Dorantes and Henson; Banneker, the almanac maker; Wood, the telephone
improver; McCoy, inventor of modern lubrication; Matseliger, who
revolutionized shoemaking. Here are names representing all degrees of
genius and talent from the mediocre to the highest, but they are strong
human testimony to the ability of this race.

We must, then, look for the origin of modern color prejudice not to
physical or cultural causes, but to historic facts. And we shall find the
answer in modern Negro slavery and the slave trade.

FOOTNOTES:

[35] "Some authors write that the Ethiopians paint the devil white, in
disdain of our complexions."--Ludolf: _History of Ethiopia_, p. 72.

[36] Ripley: _Races of Europe_, pp. 58, 62.

[37] Denniker: _Races of Men_, p. 63.

[38] G. Finot: _Race Prejudice_. F. Herz: _Moderne Rassentheorien_.

[39] Ratzel: quoted in Spiller: _Inter-Racial Problems_, p. 31.

[40] Spiller: _Inter-Racial Problems_, p. 35.

[41] Ratzel: _History of Mankind_, II, 380 ff.

[42] _Industrial Evolution_, p. 47.

[43] These and other references in this chapter are from Schneider:
CulturfÃ¤higkeit des Negers.

[44] Atlanta University Leaflet, No. 19.

[45] _Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute_, XLIII, 414, 415.
Cf. also _The Crisis_, Vol. IX, p. 234.

[46] BÃ¼cher: _Industrial Revolution_ (tr. by Wickett), pp. 57-58.

[47] Hayford: _Native Institutions_, pp. 95-96.

[48] Ratzel, II, 376.

[49] Hayford: _Native Institutions_, pp. 76 ff.

[50] _Impressions of South Africa_, 3d ed., p. 352.

[51] William Schneider.

[52] _West African Studies_, Chap. V.

[53] _Op. cit._

[54] _Impressions of South Africa._

[55] Frobenius: _Voice of Africa_, Vol. I.

[56] _West African Studies_, p. 107.

[57] Nassau: _Fetishism in West Africa_, p. 36.

[58] _EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica_, 9th ed., XX, 362.

[59] _The African Provinces_, II, 345.

[60] _Mediterranean Race_, p. 10.

[61] Stowe: _Native Races_, etc., pp. 553-554.

[62] Quoted in Schneider.

[63] Frobenius: _Voice of Africa_, Vol. I, Chap. XIV.

[64] Frobenius: _Voice of Africa_, Vol. I.

[65] Frobenius: _Voice of Africa_, I, 14-15.

[66] Frobenius: _Voice of Africa_, I, 272.

[67] Ratzel: _History of Mankind_, II, 313.

[68] Atlanta University Publications, No. 11.

[69] Robert Lowie in the _New Review_, Sept., 1914.




IX THE TRADE IN MEN


Color was never a badge of slavery in the ancient or medieval world, nor
has it been in the modern world outside of Christian states. Homer sings
of a black man, a "reverend herald"

    Of visage solemn, sad, but sable hue,
    Short, woolly curls, o'erfleeced his bending head,...
    Eurybiates, in whose large soul alone,
    Ulysses viewed an image of his own.

Greece and Rome had their chief supplies of slaves from Europe and Asia.
Egypt enslaved races of all colors, and if there were more blacks than
others among her slaves, there were also more blacks among her nobles and
Pharaohs, and both facts are explained by her racial origin and
geographical position. The fall of Rome led to a cessation of the slave
trade, but after a long interval came the white slave trade of the
Saracens and Moors, and finally the modern trade in Negroes.

Slavery as it exists universally among primitive people is a system
whereby captives in war are put to tasks about the homes and in the
fields, thus releasing the warriors for systematic fighting and the women
for leisure. Such slavery has been common among all peoples and was
wide-spread in Africa. The relative number of African slaves under these
conditions was small and the labor not hard; they were members of the
family and might and did often rise to high position in the tribe.

Remembering that in the fifteenth century there was no great disparity
between the civilization of Negroland and that of Europe, what made the
striking difference in subsequent development? European civilization, cut
off by physical barriers from further incursions of barbaric races,
settled more and more to systematic industry and to the domination of one
religion; African culture and industries were threatened by powerful
barbarians from the west and central regions of the continent and by the
Moors in the north, and Islam had only partially converted the leading
peoples.

When, therefore, a demand for workmen arose in America, European
exportation was limited by religious ties and economic stability. African
exportation was encouraged not simply by the Christian attitude toward
heathen, but also by the Moslem enmity toward the unconverted Negroes. Two
great modern religions, therefore, agreed at least in the policy of
enslaving heathen blacks, while the overthrow of black Askias by the Moors
at Tenkadibou brought that economic chaos among the advanced Negro peoples
and movement among the more barbarous tribes which proved of prime
advantage to the development of a systematic trade in men.

The modern slave trade began with the Mohammedan conquests in Africa, when
heathen Negroes were seized to supply the harems, and as soldiers and
servants. They were bought from the masters and seized in war, until the
growing wealth and luxury of the conquerors demanded larger numbers. Then
Negroes from the Egyptian Sudan, Abyssinia, and Zanzibar began to pass
into Arabia, Persia, and India in increased numbers. As Negro kingdoms and
tribes rose to power they found the slave trade lucrative and natural,
since the raids in which slaves were captured were ordinary inter-tribal
wars. It was not until the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries that the
demand for slaves in Christian lands made slaves the object, and not the
incident, of African wars.

In Mohammedan countries there were gleams of hope in slavery. In fiction
and in truth the black slave had a chance. Once converted to Islam, he
became a brother to the best, and the brotherhood of the faith was not the
sort of idle lie that Christian slave masters made it. In Arabia black
leaders arose like Antar; in India black slaves carved out principalities
where their descendants still rule.

Some Negro slaves were brought to Europe by the Spaniards in the
fourteenth century, and a small trade was continued by the Portuguese, who
conquered territory from the "tawny" Moors of North Africa in the early
fifteenth century. Later, after their severe repulse at Al-Kasr-Al-Kabu,
the Portuguese began to creep down the west coast in quest of trade. They
reached the River of Gold in 1441, and their story is that their leader
seized certain free Moors and the next year exchanged them for ten black
slaves, a target of hide, ostrich eggs, and some gold dust. The trade was
easily justified on the ground that the Moors were Mohammedans and refused
to be converted to Christianity, while heathen Negroes would be better
subjects for conversion and stronger laborers. In the next few years a
small number of Negroes continued to be imported into Spain and Portugal
as servants. We find, for instance, in 1474, that Negro slaves were common
in Seville. There is a letter from Ferdinand and Isabella in the year 1474
to a celebrated Negro, Juan de Valladolid, commonly called the "Negro
Count" (El Conde Negro), nominating him to the office of "mayoral of the
Negroes" in Seville. The slaves were apparently treated kindly, allowed to
keep their own dances and festivals, and to have their own chief, who
represented them in the courts, as against their own masters, and settled
their private quarrels.

Between 1455 and 1492 little mention is made of slaves in the trade with
Africa. Columbus is said to have suggested Negroes for America, but
Ferdinand and Isabella refused. Nevertheless, by 1501, we have the first
incidental mention of Negroes going to America in a declaration that Negro
slaves "born in the power of Christians were to be allowed to pass to the
Indies, and the officers of the royal revenue were to receive the money to
be paid for their permits."

About 1501 Ovando, Governor of Spanish America, was objecting to Negro
slaves and "solicited that no Negro slaves should be sent to Hispaniola,
for they fled amongst the Indians and taught them bad customs, and never
could be captured." Nevertheless a letter from the king to Ovando, dated
Segovia, the fifteenth of September, 1505, says, "I will send more Negro
slaves as you request; I think there may be a hundred. At each time a
trustworthy person will go with them who may have some share in the gold
they may collect and may promise them ease if they work well."[70] There
is a record of a hundred slaves being sent out this very year, and Diego
Columbus was notified of fifty to be sent from Seville for the mines in
1510.

After this time frequent notices show that Negroes were common in the new
world.[71] When Pizarro, for instance, had been slain in Peru, his body
was dragged to the cathedral by two Negroes. After the battle of Anaquito
the head of the viceroy was cut off by a Negro, and during the great
earthquake in Guatemala a most remarkable figure was a gigantic Negro seen
in various parts of the city. Nunez had thirty Negroes with him on the top
of the Sierras, and there was rumor of an aboriginal tribe of Negroes in
South America. One of the last acts of King Ferdinand was to urge that no
more Negroes be sent to the West Indies, but under Charles V, Bishop Las
Casas drew up a plan of assisted migration to America and asked in 1517
the right for immigrants to import twelve Negro slaves, in return for
which the Indians were to be freed.

Las Casas, writing in his old age, owns his error: "This advice that
license should be given to bring Negro slaves to these lands, the Clerigo
Casas first gave, not considering the injustice with which the Portuguese
take them and make them slaves; which advice, after he had apprehended the
nature of the thing, he would not have given for all he had in the world.
For he always held that they had been made slaves unjustly and
tyrannically; for the same reason holds good of them as of the
Indians[72]."

As soon as the plan was broached a Savoyard, Lorens de Gomenot, Governor
of Bresa, obtained a monopoly of this proposed trade and shrewdly sold it
to the Genoese for twenty-five thousand ducats. Other monopolies were
granted in 1523, 1527, and 1528[73]. Thus the American trade became
established and gradually grew, passing successively into the hands of the
Portuguese, the Dutch, the French, and the English.

At first the trade was of the same kind and volume as that already passing
northward over the desert routes. Soon, however, the American trade
developed. A strong, unchecked demand for brute labor in the West Indies
and on the continent of America grew until it culminated in the eighteenth
century, when Negro slaves were crossing the Atlantic at the rate of fifty
to one hundred thousand a year. This called for slave raiding on a scale
that drew upon every part of Africa--upon the west coast, the western and
Egyptian Sudan, the valley of the Congo, Abyssinia, the lake regions, the
east coast, and Madagascar. Not simply the degraded and weaker types of
Negroes were seized, but the strong Bantu, the Mandingo and Songhay, the
Nubian and Nile Negroes, the Fula, and even the Asiatic Malay, were
represented in the raids.

There was thus begun in modern days a new slavery and slave trade. It was
different from that of the past, because more and more it came in time to
be founded on racial caste, and this caste was made the foundation of a
new industrial system. For four hundred years, from 1450 to 1850, European
civilization carried on a systematic trade in human beings of such
tremendous proportions that the physical, economic, and moral effects are
still plainly to be remarked throughout the world. To this must be added
the large slave trade of Mussulman lands, which began with the seventh
century and raged almost unchecked until the end of the nineteenth
century.

These were not days of decadence, but a period that gave the world
Shakespeare, Martin Luther, and Raphael, Haroun-al-Raschid and Abraham
Lincoln. It was the day of the greatest expansion of two of the world's
most pretentious religions and of the beginnings of the modern
organization of industry. In the midst of this advance and uplift this
slave trade and slavery spread more human misery, inculcated more
disrespect for and neglect of humanity, a greater callousness to
suffering, and more petty, cruel, human hatred than can well be
calculated. We may excuse and palliate it, and write history so as to let
men forget it; it remains the most inexcusable and despicable blot on
modern human history.

The Portuguese built the first slave-trading fort at Elmina, on the Gold
Coast, in 1482, and extended their trade down the west coast and up the
east coast. Under them the abominable traffic grew larger and larger,
until it became far the most important in money value of all the commerce
of the Zambesi basin. There could be no extension of agriculture, no
mining, no progress of any kind where it was so extensively carried
on[74].

It was the Dutch, however, who launched the oversea slave trade as a
regular institution. They began their fight for freedom from Spain in
1579; in 1595, as a war measure against Spain, who at that time was
dominating Portugal, they made their first voyage to Guinea. By 1621 they
had captured Portugal's various slave forts on the west coast and they
proceeded to open sixteen forts along the coast of the Gulf of Guinea.
Ships sailed from Holland to Africa, got slaves in exchange for their
goods, carried the slaves to the West Indies or Brazil, and returned home
laden with sugar. In 1621 the private companies trading in the west were
all merged into the Dutch West India Company, which sent in four years
fifteen thousand four hundred and thirty Negroes to Brazil, carried on war
with Spain, supplied even the English plantations, and gradually became
the great slave carrier of the day.

The commercial supremacy of the Dutch early excited the envy and emulation
of the English. The Navigation Ordinance of 1651 was aimed at them, and
two wars were necessary to wrest the slave trade from them and place it in
the hands of the English. The final terms of peace, among other things,
surrendered New Netherlands to England and opened the way for England to
become henceforth the world's greatest slave trader.

The English trade began with Sir John Hawkins' voyages in 1562 and later,
in which "the Jesus, our chiefe shippe" played a leading part. Desultory
trade was kept up by the English until the middle of the seventeenth
century, when English chartered slave-trading companies began to appear.
In 1662 the "Royal Adventurers," including the king, the queen dowager,
and the Duke of York, invested in the trade, and finally the Royal African
Company, which became the world's chief slave trader, was formed in 1672
and carried on a growing trade for a quarter of a century. Jamaica had
finally been captured and held by Oliver Cromwell in 1655 and formed a
West Indian base for the trade in men.

The chief contract for trade in Negroes was the celebrated "Asiento" or
agreement of the King of Spain to the importation of slaves into Spanish
domains. The Pope's Bull or Demarkation, 1493, debarred Spain from African
possessions, and compelled her to contract with other nations for slaves.
This contract was in the hands of the Portuguese in 1600; in 1640 the
Dutch received it, and in 1701 the French. The War of the Spanish
Succession brought this monopoly to England.

This Asiento of 1713 was an agreement between England and Spain by which
the latter granted the former a monopoly of the Spanish colonial slave
trade for thirty years, and England engaged to supply the colonies within
that time with at least one hundred and forty-four thousand slaves at the
rate of forty-eight hundred per year. The English counted this prize as
the greatest result of the Treaty of Utrecht (1713), which ended the
mighty struggle against the power of Louis XIV. The English held the
monopoly until the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle (1748), although they had to
go to war over it in 1739.

From this agreement the slave traders reaped a harvest. The trade centered
at Liverpool, and that city's commercial greatness was built largely on
this foundation. In 1709 it sent out one slaver of thirty tons' burden;
encouraged by Parliamentary subsidies which amounted to nearly half a
million dollars between 1729 and 1750, the trade amounted to fifty-three
ships in 1751; eighty-six in 1765, and at the beginning of the nineteenth
century one hundred and eighty-five, which carried forty-nine thousand two
hundred and thirteen slaves in one year.

The slave trade thus begun by the Portuguese, enlarged by the Dutch, and
carried to its culmination by the English centered on the west coast near
the seat of perhaps the oldest and most interesting culture of Africa. It
came at a critical time. The culture of Yoruba, Benin, Mossiland, and Nupe
had exhausted itself in a desperate attempt to stem the on-coming flood of
Mohammedan culture. It has succeeded in maintaining its small, loosely
federated city-states suited to trade, industry, and art. It had developed
strong resistance toward the Sudan state builders toward the north, as in
the case of the fighting Mossi; but behind this warlike resistance lay the
peaceful city life which gave industrial ideas to Byzantium and shared
something of Ethiopian and Mediterranean culture.

The first advent of the slave traders increased and encouraged native
industry, as is evidenced by the bronze work of Benin; but soon this was
pushed into the background, for it was not bronze metal but bronze flesh
that Europe wanted. A new tyranny, blood-thirsty, cruel, and built on war,
forced itself forward in the Niger delta. The powerful state of Dahomey
arose early in the eighteenth century and became a devastating tyranny,
reaching its highest power early in the nineteenth century. Ashanti, a
similar kingdom, began its conquests in 1719 and grew with the slave
trade. Thus state building in West Africa began to replace the city
economy, but it was a state built on war and on war supported and
encouraged largely for the sake of trade in human flesh. The native
industries were changed and disorganized. Family ties and government were
weakened. Far into the heart of Africa this devilish disintegration,
coupled with Christian rum and Mohammedan raiding, penetrated. The face of
Africa was turned south on these slave traders instead of northward toward
the Mediterranean, where for two thousand years and more Europe and Africa
had met in legitimate trade and mutual respect. The full significance of
the battle of Tenkadibou, which overthrew the Askias, was now clear.
Hereafter Africa for centuries was to appear before the world, not as the
land of gold and ivory, of Mansa Musa and Meroe, but as a bound and
captive slave, dumb and degraded.

The natural desire to avoid a painful subject has led historians to gloss
over the details of the slave trade and leave the impression that it was a
local west-coast phenomenon and confined to a few years. It was, on the
contrary, continent wide and centuries long and an economic, social, and
political catastrophe probably unparalleled in human history.

The exact proportions of the slave trade can be estimated only
approximately. From 1680 to 1688 we know that the English African Company
alone sent 249 ships to Africa, shipped there 60,783 Negro slaves, and
after losing 14,387 on the middle passage, delivered 46,396 in America.

It seems probable that 25,000 Negroes a year arrived in America between
1698 and 1707. After the Asiento of 1713 this number rose to 30,000
annually, and before the Revolutionary War it had reached at least 40,000
and perhaps 100,000 slaves a year.

The total number of slaves imported is not known. Dunbar estimates that
nearly 900,000 came to America in the sixteenth century, 2,750,000 in the
seventeenth, 7,000,000 in the eighteenth, and over 4,000,000 in the
nineteenth, perhaps 15,000,000 in all. Certainly it seems that at least
10,000,000 Negroes were expatriated. Probably every slave imported
represented on the average five corpses in Africa or on the high seas. The
American slave trade, therefore, meant the elimination of at least
60,000,000 Negroes from their fatherland. The Mohammedan slave trade meant
the expatriation or forcible migration in Africa of nearly as many more.
It would be conservative, then, to say that the slave trade cost Negro
Africa 100,000,000 souls. And yet people ask to-day the cause of the
stagnation of culture in that land since 1600!

Such a large number of slaves could be supplied only by organized slave
raiding in every corner of Africa. The African continent gradually became
revolutionized. Whole regions were depopulated, whole tribes disappeared;
villages were built in caves and on hills or in forest fastnesses; the
character of peoples like those of Benin developed their worst excesses of
cruelty instead of the already flourishing arts of peace. The dark,
irresistible grasp of fetish took firmer hold on men's minds.

Further advances toward civilization became impossible. Not only was there
the immense demand for slaves which had its outlet on the west coast, but
the slave caravans were streaming up through the desert to the
Mediterranean coast and down the valley of the Nile to the centers of
Mohammedanism. It was a rape of a continent to an extent never paralleled
in ancient or modern times.

In the American trade there was not only the horrors of the slave raid,
which lined the winding paths of the African jungles with bleached bones,
but there was also the horrors of what was called the "middle passage,"
that is, the voyage across the Atlantic. As Sir William Dolben said, "The
Negroes were chained to each other hand and foot, and stowed so close that
they were not allowed above a foot and a half for each in breadth. Thus
crammed together like herrings in a barrel, they contracted putrid and
fatal disorders; so that they who came to inspect them in a morning had
occasionally to pick dead slaves out of their rows, and to unchain their
carcases from the bodies of their wretched fellow-sufferers to whom they
had been fastened[75]."

It was estimated that out of every one hundred lot shipped from Africa
only about fifty lived to be effective laborers across the sea, and among
the whites more seamen died in that trade in one year than in the whole
remaining trade of England in two. The full realization of the horrors of
the slave trade was slow in reaching the ears and conscience of the modern
world, just as to-day the treatment of dark natives in European colonies
is brought to publicity with the greatest difficulty. The first move
against the slave trade in England came in Parliament in 1776, but it was
not until thirty-one years later, in 1807, that the trade was banned
through the arduous labors of Clarkson, Wilberforce, Sharpe, and others.

Denmark had already abolished the trade, and the United States attempted
to do so the following year. Portugal and Spain were induced to abolish
the trade between 1815 and 1830. Notwithstanding these laws, the
contraband trade went on until the beginning of the Civil War in America.
The reasons for this were the enormous profit of the trade and the
continued demand of the American slave barons, who had no sympathy with
the efforts to stop their source of cheap labor supply.

However, philanthropy was not working alone to overthrow Negro slavery and
the slave trade. It was seen, first in England and later in other
countries, that slavery as an industrial system could not be made to work
satisfactorily in modern times. Its cost was too great, and one of the
causes of this cost was the slave insurrections from the very beginning,
when the slaves rose on the plantation of Diego Columbus down to the Civil
War in America. Actual and potential slave insurrection in the West
Indies, in North and South America, kept the slave owners in apprehension
and turmoil, or called for a police system difficult to maintain. In North
America revolt finally took the form of organized running away to the
North, and this, with the growing scarcity of suitable land and the moral
revolt, led to the Civil War and the disappearance of the American slave
trade.

There was still, however, the Mohammedan slave trade to deal with, and
this has been the work of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. In
the last quarter of the nineteenth century ten thousand slaves annually
were being distributed on the southern and eastern coast of the
Mediterranean and at the great slave market in Bornu.

On the east coast of Africa in 1862 nineteen thousand slaves were passed
into Zanzibar and thence into Arabia and Persia. As late as 1880, three
thousand annually were being thus transplanted, but now the trade is about
stopped. To-day the only centers of actual slave trading may be said to be
the cocoa plantations of the Portuguese Islands on the west coast of
Africa, and the Congo Free State.

Such is the story of the Rape of Ethiopia--a sordid, pitiful, cruel tale.
Raphael painted, Luther preached, Corneille wrote, and Milton sung; and
through it all, for four hundred years, the dark captives wound to the sea
amid the bleaching bones of the dead; for four hundred years the sharks
followed the scurrying ships; for four hundred years America was strewn
with the living and dying millions of a transplanted race; for four
hundred years Ethiopia stretched forth her hands unto God.

FOOTNOTES:

[70] Cf. Helps: _Spanish Conquest_, IV, 401.

[71] Helps, _op. cit._, I, 219-220.

[72] Helps, _op. cit._, II, 18-19.

[73] Helps, _op. cit._, III, 211-212.

[74] Theal: _History and Ethnography of South Africa before 1795_, I, 476.

[75] Ingram: _History of Slavery_, p. 152.




X THE WEST INDIES AND LATIN AMERICA


That was a wonderful century, the fifteenth, when men realized that beyond
the scowling waste of western waters were dreams come true. Curious and
yet crassly human it is that, with all this poetry and romance, arose at
once the filthiest institution of the modern world and the costliest. For
on Negro slavery in America was built, not simply the abortive cotton
kingdom, but the foundations of that modern imperialism which is based on
the despising of backward men.

According to some accounts Alonzo, "the Negro," piloted one of the ships
of Columbus, and certainly there was Negro blood among his sailors. As
early as 1528 there were nearly ten thousand Negroes in the new world. We
hear of them in all parts. In Honduras, for instance, a Negro is sent to
burn a native village; in 1555 the town council of Santiago de Chile voted
to allow an enfranchised Negro possession of land in the town, and
evidently treated him just as white applicants were treated. D'Allyon, who
explored the coast of Virginia in the first quarter of the sixteenth
century, used Negro slaves (who afterward revolted) to build his ships and
help in exploration; Balboa had with him thirty Negroes, who, in 1513,
helped to build the first ships on the Pacific coast; Cortez had three
hundred Negro porters in 1522.

Before 1530 there were enough Negroes in Mexico to lead to an
insurrection, where the Negroes fought desperately, but were overcome and
their ringleaders executed. Later the followers of another Negro
insurgent, Bayano, were captured and sent back to Spain. Negroes founded
the town of Santiago del Principe in 1570, and in 1540 a Negro slave of
Hernandez de Alarcon was the only one of the party to carry a message
across the country to the Zunis of New Mexico. A Negro, Stephen Dorantes,
discovered New Mexico. This Stephen or "Estevanico" was sent ahead by
certain Spanish friars to the "Seven Cities of Cibola." "As soon as
Stephen had left said friars, he determined to earn all the reputation and
honor for himself, and that the boldness and daring of having alone
discovered those villages of high stories so much spoken of throughout
that country should be attributed to him; and carrying along with him the
people who followed him, he endeavored to cross the wilderness which is
between Cibola and the country he had gone through, and he was so far
ahead of the friars that when they arrived at Chichilticalli, which is on
the edge of the wilderness, he was already at Cibola, which is eighty
leagues of wilderness beyond." But the Indians of the new and strange
country took alarm and concluded that Stephen "must be a spy or guide for
some nations who intended to come and conquer them, because it seemed to
them unreasonable for him to say that the people were white in the country
from which he came, being black himself and being sent by them."[76]

Slaves imported under the Asiento treaties went to all parts of the
Americas. Spanish America had by the close of the eighteenth century ten
thousand in Santo Domingo, eighty-four thousand in Cuba, fifty thousand in
Porto Rico, sixty thousand in Louisiana and Florida, and sixty thousand in
Central and South America.

The history of the Negro in Spanish America centered in Cuba, Venezuela,
and Central America. In the sixteenth century slaves began to arrive in
Cuba and Negroes joined many of the exploring expeditions from there to
various parts of America. The slave trade greatly increased in the latter
part of the eighteenth century, and after the revolution in Hayti large
numbers of French emigrants from that island settled in Cuba. This and
Spanish greed increased the harshness of slavery and eventually led to
revolt among the Negroes. In 1844 Governor O'Donnell began a cruel
persecution of the blacks on account of a plot discovered among them.
Finally in 1866 the Ten Years' War broke out in which Negro and white
rebels joined. They demanded the abolition of slavery and equal political
rights for natives and foreigners, whites and blacks. The war was cruel
and bloody but ended in 1878 with the abolition of slavery, while a
further uprising the following year secured civil rights for Negroes.
Spanish economic oppression continued, however, and the leading chiefs of
the Ten Years' War including such leaders as the mulatto, Antonio Maceo,
with large numbers of Negro soldiers, took the field again in 1895. The
result was the freeing of Cuba by the intervention of the United States.
Negro regiments from the United States played here a leading role. A
number of leaders in Cuba in political, industrial, and literary lines
have been men of Negro descent.

Slavery was abolished by Guatemala in 1824 and by Mexico in 1829.
Argentine, Peru, Bolivia, Chile, and Paraguay ceased to recognize it about
1825. Between 1840 and 1845 it came to an end in Colombia, Venezuela, and
Ecquador. Bolivar, Paez, Sucre, and other South American leaders used
Negro soldiers in fighting for freedom (1814-16), and Hayti twice at
critical times rendered assistance and received Bolivar twice as a
refugee.

Brazil was the center of Portuguese slavery, but slaves were not
introduced in large numbers until about 1720, when diamonds were
discovered in the territory above Rio Janeiro. Gradually the seaboard from
Pernambuco to Rio Janeiro and beyond became filled with Negroes, and
although the slave trade north of the equator was theoretically abolished
by Portugal in 1815 and south of the equator in 1830, and by Brazil in
these regions in 1826 and 1830, nevertheless between 1825 and 1850 over a
million and a quarter of Negroes were introduced. Not until Brazil
abolished slavery in 1888 did the importation wholly cease. Brazilian
slavery allowed the slave to purchase his freedom, and the color line was
not strict. Even in the eighteenth century there were black clergy and
bishops; indeed the Negro clergy seem to have been on a higher moral level
than the whites.

Insurrection was often attempted, especially among the Mohammedan Negroes
around Bahia. In 1695 a tribe of revolted slaves held out for a long time.
In 1719 a widespread conspiracy failed, but many of the leaders fled to
the forest. In 1828 a thousand rose in revolt at Bahia, and again in 1830.
From 1831 to 1837 revolt was in the air, and in 1835 came the great revolt
of the Mohammedans, who attempted to enthrone a queen. The Negroes fought
with furious bravery, but were finally defeated.

By 1872 the number of free Negroes had very greatly increased, so that
emancipation did not come as a shock. While Mohammedan Negroes still gave
trouble and were in some cases sent back to Africa, yet on the whole
emancipation was peaceful, and whites, Negroes, and Indians are to-day
amalgamating into a new race. "At the present moment there is scarcely a
lowly or a highly placed federal or provincial official at the head of or
within any of the great departments of state that has not more or less
Negro or Amer-Indian blood in his veins."[77]

Lord Bryce says, "It is hardly too much to say that along the coast from
Rio to Bahia and Pernambuco, as well as in parts of the interior behind
these two cities, the black population predominates.... The Brazilian
lower class intermarries freely with the black people; the Brazilian
middle class intermarries with mulattoes and Quadroons. Brazil is the one
country in the world, besides the Portuguese colonies on the east and west
coasts of Africa, in which a fusion of the European and African races is
proceeding unchecked by law or custom. The doctrines of human equality and
human solidarity have here their perfect work. The result is so far
satisfactory that there is little or no class friction. The white man does
not lynch or maltreat the Negro; indeed I have never heard of a lynching
anywhere in South America except occasionally as part of a political
convulsion. The Negro is not accused of insolence and does not seem to
develop any more criminality than naturally belongs to any ignorant
population with loose notions of morality and property.

"What ultimate effect the intermixture of blood will have on the European
element in Brazil I will not venture to predict. If one may judge from a
few remarkable cases, it will not necessarily reduce the intellectual
standard. One of the ablest and most refined Brazilians I have known had
some color; and other such cases have been mentioned to me. Assumptions
and preconceptions must be eschewed, however plausible they may
seem."[78]

A Brazilian writer said at the First Races Congress: "The coÃ¶peration of
the _metis_[79] in the advance of Brazil is notorious and far from
inconsiderable. They played the chief part during many years in Brazil in
the campaign for the abolition of slavery. I could quote celebrated names
of more than one of these _metis_ who put themselves at the head of the
literary movement. They fought with firmness and intrepidity in the press
and on the platform. They faced with courage the gravest perils to which
they were exposed in their struggle against the powerful slave owners, who
had the protection of a conservative government. They gave evidence of
sentiments of patriotism, self-denial, and appreciation during the long
campaign in Paraguay, fighting heroically at the boarding of the ships in
the naval battle of Riachuelo and in the attacks on the Brazilian army, on
numerous occasions in the course of this long South American war. It was
owing to their support that the republic was erected on the ruins of the
empire."[80]

The Dutch brought the first slaves to the North American continent. John
Rolfe relates that the last of August, 1619, there came to Virginia "a
Dutch man of warre that sold us twenty Negars."[81] This was probably one
of the ships of the numerous private Dutch trading companies which early
entered into the developed and the lucrative African slave trade. Although
the Dutch thus commenced the continental slave trade they did not actually
furnish a very large number of slaves to the English colonies outside the
West Indies. A small trade had by 1698 brought a few thousand to New York
and still fewer to New Jersey.

The Dutch found better scope for slaves in Guiana, which they settled in
1616. Sugar cane became the staple crop, but the Negroes early began to
revolt and the Dutch brought in East Indian coolies. The slaves were badly
treated and the runaways joined the revolted Bush Negroes in the interior.
From 1715 to 1775 there was continuous fighting with the Bush Negroes or
insurrections, until at last in 1749 a formal treaty between sixteen
hundred Negroes and the Dutch was made. Immediately a new group revolted
under a Mohammedan, Arabi, and they obtained land and liberty. In 1763 the
coast Negroes revolted. They were checked, but made terms and settled in
the interior. The Bush Negroes fought against both French and English to
save Guiana to the Dutch, but Guiana was eventually divided between the
three. The Bush Negroes still maintain their independence and vigor.

The French encouraged settlements in the West Indies in the seventeenth
century, but at last, finding that French immigrants would not come, they
began about 1642 to import Negroes. Owing to wars with England, slaves
were supplied by the Dutch and Portuguese, although the Royal Senegal
Company held the coveted Asiento from 1701 to 1713.

It was in the island of Hayti, however, that French slavery centered.
Pirates from many nations, but chiefly French, began to frequent the
island, and in 1663 the French annexed the eastern part, thus dividing the
island between France and Spain. By 1680 there were so many slaves and
mulattoes that Louis XIV issued his celebrated Code Noir, which was
notable in compelling bachelor masters, fathers of slave children, to
marry their concubines. Children followed the condition of the mother as
to slavery or freedom; they could have no property; harsh punishments were
provided for, but families could not be separated by sale except in the
case of grown children; emancipation with full civil rights was made
possible for any slave twenty years of age or more. When Louisiana was
settled and the Alabama coast, slaves were introduced there. Louisiana was
transferred to Spain in 1762, against the resistance of both settlers and
slaves, but Spain took possession in 1769 and introduced more Negroes.

Later, in Hayti, a more liberal policy encouraged trade; war was over and
capital and slaves poured in. Sugar, coffee, chocolate, indigo, dyes, and
spices were raised. There were large numbers of mulattoes, many of whom
were educated in France, and many masters married Negro women who had
inherited large properties, just as in the United States to-day white men
are marrying eagerly the landed Indian women in the West. When white
immigration increased in 1749, however, prejudice arose against these
mulattoes and severe laws were passed depriving them of civil rights,
entrance into the professions, and the right to hold office; severe edicts
were enforced as to clothing, names, and social intercourse. Finally,
after 1777, mulattoes were forbidden to come to France.

When the French Revolution broke out, the Haytians managed to send two
delegates to Paris. Nevertheless the planters maintained the upper hand,
and one of the colored delegates, Oge, on returning, started a small
rebellion. He and his companions were killed with great brutality. This
led the French government to grant full civil rights to free Negroes,
Immediately planters and free Negroes flew to arms against each other and
then, suddenly, August 22, 1791, the black slaves, of whom there were four
hundred and fifty-two thousand, arose in revolt to help the free Negroes.

For many years runaway slaves had hidden in the mountains under their own
chiefs. One of the earliest of these chiefs was Polydor, in 1724, who was
succeeded by Macandal. The great chief of these runaways or "Maroons" at
the time of the slave revolt was Jean FranÃ§ois, who was soon succeeded by
Biassou.

Pierre Dominic Toussaint, known as Toussaint L'Ouverture, joined these
Maroon bands, where he was called "the doctor of the armies of the king,"
and soon became chief aid to Jean FranÃ§ois and Biassou. Upon their deaths
Toussaint rose to the chief command. He acquired complete control over the
blacks, not only in military matters, but in politics and social
organization; "the soldiers regarded him as a superior being, and the
farmers prostrated themselves before him. All his generals trembled before
him (Dessalines did not dare to look in his face), and all the world
trembled before his generals."[82]

The revolt once started, blacks and mulattoes murdered whites without
mercy and the whites retaliated. Commissioners were sent from France, who
asked simply civil rights for freedmen, and not emancipation. Indeed that
was all that Toussaint himself had as yet demanded. The planters intrigued
with the British and this, together with the beheading of the king (an
impious act in the eyes of Negroes), induced Toussaint to join the
Spaniards. In 1793 British troops were landed and the French commissioners
in desperation declared the slaves emancipated. This at once won back
Toussaint from the Spaniards. He became supreme in the north, while
Rigaud, leader of the mulattoes, held the south and the west. By 1798 the
British, having lost most of their forces by yellow fever, surrendered
Mole St. Nicholas to Toussaint and departed. Rigaud finally left for
France, and Toussaint in 1800 was master of Hayti. He promulgated a
constitution under which Hayti was to be a self-governing colony; all men
were equal before the law, and trade was practically free. Toussaint was
to be president for life, with the power to name his successor.

Napoleon Bonaparte, master of France, had at this time dreams of a great
American empire, and replied to Toussaint's new government by sending
twenty-five thousand men under his brother-in-law to subdue the
presumptuous Negroes, as a preliminary step to his occupation and
development of the Mississippi valley. Fierce fighting and yellow fever
decimated the French, but matters went hard with the Negroes too, and
Toussaint finally offered to yield. He was courteously received with
military honors and then, as soon as possible, treacherously seized,
bound, and sent to France. He was imprisoned at Fort Joux and died,
perhaps of poison, after studied humiliations, April 7, 1803.

Thus perished the greatest of American Negroes and one of the great men of
all time, at the age of fifty-six. A French planter said, "God in his
terrestrial globe did not commune with a purer spirit."[83] Wendell
Phillips said, "Some doubt the courage of the Negro. Go to Hayti and stand
on those fifty thousand graves of the best soldiers France ever had and
ask them what they think of the Negro's sword. I would call him Napoleon,
but Napoleon made his way to empire over broken oaths and through a sea of
blood. This man never broke his word. I would call him Cromwell, but
Cromwell was only a soldier, and the state he founded went down with him
into his grave. I would call him Washington, but the great Virginian held
slaves. This man risked his empire rather than permit the slave trade in
the humblest village of his dominions. You think me a fanatic, for you
read history, not with your eyes, but with your prejudices. But fifty
years hence, when Truth gets a hearing, the Muse of history will put
Phocion for the Greek, Brutus for the Roman, Hampden for the English, La
Fayette for France, choose Washington as the bright, consummate flower of
our earlier civilization, then, dipping her pen in the sunlight, will
write in the clear blue, above them all, the name of the soldier, the
statesman, the martyr, Toussaint L'Ouverture."

The treacherous killing of Toussaint did not conquer Hayti. In 1802 and
1803 some forty thousand French soldiers died of war and fever. A new
colored leader, Dessalines, arose and all the eight thousand remaining
French surrendered to the blockading British fleet.

The effect of all this was far-reaching. Napoleon gave up his dream of
American empire and sold Louisiana for a song. "Thus, all of Indian
Territory, all of Kansas and Nebraska and Iowa and Wyoming and Montana and
the Dakotas, and most of Colorado and Minnesota, and all of Washington and
Oregon states, came to us as the indirect work of a despised Negro.
Praise, if you will, the work of a Robert Livingstone or a Jefferson, but
to-day let us not forget our debt to Toussaint L'Ouverture, who was
indirectly the means of America's expansion by the Louisiana Purchase of
1803."[84]

With the freedom of Hayti in 1801 came a century of struggle to fit the
people for the freedom they had won. They were yet slaves, crushed by a
cruel servitude, without education or religious instruction. The Haytian
leaders united upon Dessalines to maintain the independence of the
republic. Dessalines, like Toussaint and his lieutenant Christophe, was
noted in slavery days for his severity toward his fellows and the
discipline which he insisted on. He had other characteristics of African
chieftains. "There were seasons when he broke through his natural
sullenness and showed himself open, affable, and even generous. His vanity
was excessive and manifested itself in singular perversities."[85] He was
a man of great personal bravery and succeeded in maintaining the
independence of Hayti, which had already cost the Frenchmen fifty thousand
lives.

On January 1, 1804, at the place whence Toussaint had been treacherously
seized and sent to France, the independence of Hayti was declared by the
military leaders. Dessalines was made governor-general for life and
afterward proclaimed himself emperor. This was not an act of
grandiloquence and mimicry. "It is truer to say that in it both Dessalines
and later Christophe were actuated by a clear insight into the social
history and peculiarities of their people. There was nothing in the
constitution which did not have its companion in Africa, where the
organization of society was despotic, with elective hereditary chiefs,
royal families, polygamic marriages, councils, and regencies."[86]

The population was divided into soldiers and laborers. The territory was
parceled out to chiefs, and the laborers were bound to the soil and worked
under rigorous inspection; part of the products were reserved for their
support, and the rest went to the chiefs, the king, the general
government, and the army. The army was under stern discipline and
military service was compulsory. Women did much of the agricultural labor.
Under Toussaint the administration of this system was committed to
Dessalines, who carried it out with rigor; it was afterward followed by
Christophe. The latter even imported four thousand Negroes from Africa,
from whom he formed a national guard for patrolling the land. These
regulations brought back for a time a large part of the former prosperity
of the island.

The severity with which Dessalines enforced the laws soon began to turn
many against him. The educated mulattoes especially objected to submission
to the savage African _mores_. Dessalines started to suppress their
revolt, but was killed in ambush in October, 1806.

Great Britain now began to intrigue for a protectorate over the island and
the Spanish end of the island threatened attack. These difficulties were
overcome, but at a cost of great internal strain. After the death of
Dessalines it seemed that Hayti was about to dissolve into a number of
petty subdivisions. At one time Christophe was ruling as king in the
north, Petion as president at Port au Prince, Rigaud in the south, and a
semi-brigand, Goman, in the extreme southwest. Very soon, however, the
rivalry narrowed down to Petion and Christophe. Petion was a man of
considerable ability and did much, not simply for Hayti, but for South
America. Already as early as 1779, before the revolution in Hayti, the
Haytian Negroes had helped the United States. The British had captured
Savannah in 1778. The French fleet appeared on the coast of Georgia late
that year and was ordered to recruit men in Hayti. Eight hundred young
freedmen, blacks and mulattoes, offered to take part in the expedition,
and they fought valiantly in the siege and covered themselves with glory.
It was this legion that made the charge on the British and saved the
retreating American army. Among the men who fought there was Christophe.

When Simon Bolivar, Commodore Aury, and many Venezuelan families were
driven from their country in 1815, they and their ships took temporary
refuge in Hayti. Notwithstanding the embarrassed condition of the
republic, Petion received them and gave them four thousand rifles with
ammunition, provisions, and last and best a printing press. He also
settled some international quarrels among members of the groups, and
Bolivar expressed himself afterward as being "overwhelmed with magnanimous
favors."[87]

Petion died in 1818 and was succeeded by his friend Boyer. Christophe
committed suicide the following year and Boyer became not simply ruler of
western Hayti, but also, by arrangement with the eastern end of the
island, gained the mastery there, where they were afraid of Spanish
aggression. Thus from 1822 to 1843 Boyer, a man of much ability, ruled the
whole of the island and gained the recognition of Haytian independence
from France and other nations.

France, under Charles X, demanded an indemnity of thirty million dollars
to reimburse the planters for confiscated lands and property. This Hayti
tried to pay, but the annual installment was a tremendous burden to the
impoverished country. Further negotiations were entered into. Finally in
1838 France recognized the independence of the republic and the indemnity
was reduced to twelve million dollars. Even this was a large burden for
Hayti, and the payment of it for years crippled the island.

The United States and Great Britain in 1825-26 recognized the independence
of Hayti. A concordat was arranged with the Pope for governing the church
in Hayti, and finally in 1860 the church placed under the French
hierarchy. Thus Boyer did unusually well; but his necessary concessions to
France weakened his influence at home, and finally an earthquake, which
destroyed several towns in 1842, raised the superstitious of the populace
against him. He resigned in 1843, leaving the treasury well filled; but
with his withdrawal the Spanish portion of the island was lost to Hayti.

The subsequent history of Hayti since 1843 has been the struggle of a
small divided country to maintain political independence. The rich
resources of the country called for foreign capital, but outside capital
meant political influence from abroad, which the little nation rightly
feared. Within, the old antagonism between the freedman and the slave
settled into a color line between the mulatto and the black, which for a
time meant the difference between educated liberalism and reactionary
ignorance. This difference has largely disappeared, but some vestiges of
the color line remain. The result has been reaction and savagery under
Soulouque, Dominique, and Nord Alexis, and decided advance under
presidents like Nissage-Saget, Solomon, Legitime, and Hyppolite.

In political life Hayti is still in the sixteenth century; but in
economic life she has succeeded in placing on their own little farms the
happiest and most contented peasantry in the world, after raising them
from a veritable hell of slavery. If modern capitalistic greed can be
restrained from interference until the best elements of Hayti secure
permanent political leadership the triumph of the revolution will be
complete.

In other parts of the French-American dominion the slaves achieved freedom
also by insurrection. In Guadeloupe they helped the French drive out the
British, and thus gained emancipation. In Martinique it took three revolts
and a civil war to bring freedom.

The English slave empire in America centered in the Bermudas, Barbadoes,
Jamaica and the lesser islands, and in the United States. Barbadoes
developed a savage slave code, and the result was attempted slave
insurrections in 1674, 1692, and 1702. These were not successful, but a
rising in 1816 destroyed much property under the leadership of a mulatto,
Washington Franklin, and the repeal of bad laws and eventual
enfranchisement of the colored people followed. One Barbadian mulatto, Sir
Conrad Reeves, has held the position of chief justice in the island and
was knighted. A Negro insurrection in Dominica under Farcel greatly
exercised England in 1791 and 1794 and delayed slave trade abolition; in
1844 and 1847 further uprisings took place, and these continued from 1853
to 1893.

The chief island domain of English slavery was Jamaica. It was Oliver
Cromwell who, in his zeal for God and the slave trade, sent an expedition
to seize Hayti. His fleet, driven off there, took Jamaica in 1655. The
English found the mountains already infested with runaway slaves known as
"Maroons," and more Negroes joined them when the English arrived. In 1663
the freedom of the Maroons was acknowledged, land was given them, and
their leader, Juan de Bolas, was made a colonel in the militia. He was
killed, however, in the following year, and from 1664 to 1738 the three
thousand or more black Maroons fought the British Empire in guerrilla
warfare. Soldiers, Indians, and dogs were sent against them, and finally
in 1738 Captain Cudjo and other chiefs made a formal treaty of peace with
Governor Trelawney. They were granted twenty-five hundred acres and their
freedom was recognized.

The peace lasted until 1795, when they rebelled again and gave the
British a severe drubbing, besides murdering planters. Bloodhounds again
were imported. The Maroons offered to surrender on the express condition
that none of their number should be deported from the island, as the
legislature wished. General Walpole hesitated, but could get peace on no
other terms and gave his word. The Maroons surrendered their arms, and
immediately the whites seized six hundred of the ringleaders and
transported them to the snows of Nova Scotia! The legislature then voted a
sword worth twenty-five hundred dollars to General Walpole, which he
indignantly refused to accept. Eventually these exiled Maroons found their
way to Sierra Leone, West Africa, in time to save that colony to the
British crown.[88]

The pressing desire for peace with the Maroons on the part of the white
planters arose from the new sugar culture introduced in 1673. A greatly
increased demand for slaves followed, and between 1700 and 1786 six
hundred and ten thousand slaves were imported; nevertheless, so severely
were they driven, that there were only three hundred thousand Negroes in
Jamaica in the latter year.

Despite the Moravian missions and other efforts late in the eighteenth
century, unrest among the Jamaica slaves and freedmen grew and was
increased by the anti-slavery agitation in England and the revolt in
Hayti. There was an insurrection in 1796; and in 1831 again the Negroes of
northwest Jamaica, impatient because of the slow progress of the
emancipation, arose in revolt and destroyed nearly three and a half
million dollars' worth of property, well-nigh ruining the planters there.
The next year two hundred and fifty-five thousand slaves were set free,
for which the planters were paid nearly thirty million dollars. There
ensued a discouraging condition of industry. The white officials sent out
in these days were arbitrary and corrupt. Little was done for the mass of
the people and there was outrageous over-taxation. Nevertheless the
backwardness of the colony was attributed to the Negro. Governor Eyre
complained in 1865 that the young and strong were good for nothing and
were filling the jails; but a simultaneous report by a missionary told the
truth concerning the officials. This aroused the colored people, and a
mulatto, George William Gordon, called a meeting. Other meetings were
afterward held, and finally the Negro peasantry began a riot in 1861, in
which eighteen people were killed, only a few of whom were white.

The result was that Governor Eyre tried and executed by court-martial 354
persons, and in addition to this killed without trial 85, a total of 439.
One thousand Negro homes were burned to the ground and thousands of
Negroes flogged or mutilated. Children had their brains dashed out,
pregnant women were murdered, and Gordon was tried by court-martial and
hanged. In fact the punishment was, as the royal commissioners said,
"reckless and positively barbarous."[89]

This high-handed act aroused England. Eyre was not punished, but the
island was made a crown colony in 1866, and given representation in the
legislature in 1886.

In the island of St. Vincent, Indians first sought to enslave the fugitive
Negroes wrecked there, but the Negroes took the Carib women and then drove
the Indian men away. These "black Caribs" fought with Indians, English,
and others for three quarters of a century, until the Indians were
exterminated. The British took possession in 1763. The black Caribs
resisted, and after hard fighting signed a treaty in 1773, receiving
one-third of the island as their property. They afterward helped the
French against the British, and were finally deported to the island of
Ruatan, off Honduras. In Trinidad and British Guiana there have been
mutinies and rioting of slaves and a curious mingling of races.

Other parts of South America must be dismissed briefly, because of
insufficient data. Colombia and Venezuela, with perhaps eight million
people, have at least one-third of their population of Negro and Indian
descent. Here Simon Bolivar with his Negro, mulatto, and Indian forces
began the war that liberated South America. Central America has a smaller
proportion of Negroids, perhaps one hundred thousand in all. Bolivia and
Peru have small amounts of Negro blood, while Argentine and Uruguay have
very little. The Negro population in these lands is everywhere in process
of rapid amalgamation with whites and Indians.

FOOTNOTES:

[76] H.O. Flipper's translation of Castaneda de Nafera's narrative.

[77] Johnston: _Negro in the New World_, p. 109.

[78] Bryce: _South America_, pp. 479-480.

[79] I.e., mulattoes.

[80] _Inter-Racial Problems_, p. 381.

[81] Smith: _General History of Virginia_.

[82] La Croix: _MÃ©moires sur la RÃ©volution_, I, 253, 408.

[83] Marquis d'Hermonas. Cf. Johnston: _Negro in the New World_, p. 158.

[84] DeWitt Talmage, in Christian Herald, November 28, 1906.

[85] Aimes: _African Institutions in America_ (reprinted from _Journal of
American Folk Lore_), p. 25.

[86] Brown: _History of San Domingo_, II, 158-159.

[87] See Leger: _Hayti_, Chap. XI.

[88] Cf. Chapter V, p. 69.

[89] Johnston: _Negro in the New World_.




XI THE NEGRO IN THE UNITED STATES


There were half a million slaves in the confines of the United States when
the Declaration of Independence declared "that all men are created equal;
that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights;
that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness." The
land that thus magniloquently heralded its advent into the family of
nations had supported the institution of human slavery for one hundred and
fifty-seven years and was destined to cling to it eighty-seven years
longer.

The greatest experiment in Negro slavery as a modern industrial system was
made on the mainland of North America and in the confines of the present
United States. And this experiment was on such a scale and so
long-continued that it is profitable for study and reflection. There were
in the United States in its dependencies, in 1910, 9,828,294 persons of
acknowledged Negro descent, not including the considerable infiltration of
Negro blood which is not acknowledged and often not known. To-day the
number of persons called Negroes is probably about ten and a quarter
million. These persons are almost entirely descendants of African slaves,
brought to America in the sixteenth, seventeenth, eighteenth, and
nineteenth centuries.

The importation of Negroes to the mainland of North America was small
until the British got the coveted privilege of the Asiento in 1713. Before
that Northern States like New York had received some slaves from the
Dutch, and New England had early developed a trade by which she imported a
number of house servants. Ships went out to the African coast with rum,
sold the rum, and brought the slaves to the West Indies; there they
exchanged the slaves for sugar and molasses and brought the molasses back
to New England, to be made into rum for further exploits. After the
Asiento treaty the Negro population increased in the eighteenth century
from about 50,000 in 1710 to 220,000 in 1750 and to 462,000 in 1770. When
the colonies became independent, the foreign slave trade was soon made
illegal; but illicit trade, annexation of territory and natural increase
enlarged the Negro population from a little over a million at the
beginning of the nineteenth century to four and a half millions at the
outbreak of the Civil War and to about ten and a quarter millions in 1914.

The present so-called Negro population of the United States is:

1. A mixture of the various African populations, Bantu, Sudanese,
west-coast Negroes, some dwarfs, and some traces of Arab, Berber, and
Semitic blood.

2. A mixture of these strains with the blood of white Americans through a
system of concubinage of colored women in slavery days, together with some
legal intermarriage.

The figures as to mulattoes[90] have been from time to time officially
acknowledged to be understatements. Probably one-third of the Negroes of
the United States have distinct traces of white blood. This blending of
the races has led to interesting human types, but racial prejudice has
hitherto prevented any scientific study of the matter. In general the
Negro population in the United States is brown in color, darkening to
almost black and shading off in the other direction to yellow and white,
and is indistinguishable in some cases from the white population.

Much has been written of the black man in America, but most of this has
been from the point of view of the whites, so that we know of the effect
of Negro slavery on the whites, the strife among the whites for and
against abolition, and the consequent problem of the Negro so far as the
white population is concerned.

This chapter, however, is dealing with the matter more from the point of
view of the Negro group itself, and seeking to show what slavery meant to
them, how they reacted against it, what they did to secure their freedom,
and what they are doing with their partial freedom to-day.

The slaves landing from 1619 onward were received by the colonies at first
as laborers, on the same plane as other laborers. For a long time there
was in law no distinction between the indented white servant from England
and the black servant from Africa, except in the term of their service.
Even here the distinction was not always observed, some of the whites
being kept beyond term of their service and Negroes now and then securing
their freedom. Gradually the planters realized the advantage of laborers
held for life, but they were met by certain moral difficulties. The
opposition to slavery had from the first been largely stilled when it was
stated that this was a method of converting the heathen to Christianity.
The corollary was that when a slave was converted he became free. Up to
1660 or thereabouts it seemed accepted in most colonies and in the English
West Indies that baptism into a Christian church would free a Negro slave.
Masters therefore, were reluctant in the seventeenth century to have their
slaves receive Christian instruction. Massachusetts first apparently
legislated on this matter by enacting in 1641 that slavery should be
confined to captives in just wars "and such strangers as willingly sell
themselves or are sold to us,"[91] meaning by "strangers" apparently
heathen, but saying nothing as to the effect of conversion. Connecticut
adopted similar legislation in 1650, and Virginia declared in 1661 that
Negroes "are incapable of making satisfaction" for time lost in running
away by lengthening their time of services, thus implying that they were
slaves for life. Maryland declared in 1663 that Negro slaves should serve
_durante vita_, but it was not until 1667 that Virginia finally plucked up
courage to attack the issue squarely and declared by law: "Baptism doth
not alter the condition of the person as to his bondage or freedom, in
order that diverse masters freed from this doubt may more carefully
endeavor the propagation of Christianity."[92]

The transplanting of the Negro from his African clan life to the West
Indian plantation was a social revolution. Marriage became geographical
and transient, while women and girls were without protection.

The private home as a self-protective, independent unit did not exist.
That powerful institution, the polygamous African home, was almost
completely destroyed, and in its place in America arose sexual
promiscuity, a weak community life, with common dwelling, meals, and child
nurseries. The internal slave trade tended further to weaken natural ties.
A small number of favored house servants and artisans were raised above
this--had their private homes, came in contact with the culture of the
master class, and assimilated much of American civilization. This was,
however, exceptional; broadly speaking, the greatest social effect of
American slavery was to substitute for the polygamous Negro home a new
polygamy less guarded, less effective, and less civilized.

At first sight it would seem that slavery completely destroyed every
vestige of spontaneous movement among the Negroes. This is not strictly
true. The vast power of the priest in the African state is well known; his
realm alone--the province of religion and medicine--remained largely
unaffected by the plantation system. The Negro priest, therefore, early
became an important figure on the plantation and found his function as the
interpreter of the supernatural, the comforter of the sorrowing, and as
the one who expressed, rudely but picturesquely, the longing and
disappointment and resentment of a stolen people. From such beginnings
arose and spread with marvelous rapidity the Negro church, the first
distinctively Negro American social institution. It was not at first by
any means a Christian church, but a mere adaptation of those rites of
fetish which in America is termed obe worship, or "voodooism."[93]
Association and missionary effort soon gave these rites a veneer of
Christianity and gradually, after two centuries, the church became
Christian, with a simple Calvinistic creed, but with many of the old
customs still clinging to the services. It is this historic fact, that the
Negro church of to-day bases itself upon the sole surviving social
institution of the African fatherland, that accounts for its extraordinary
growth and vitality.

The slave codes at first were really labor codes based on an attempt to
reestablish in America the waning feudalism of Europe. The laborers were
mainly black and were held for life. Above them came the artisans, free
whites with a few blacks, and above them the master class. The feudalism
called for the plantation system, and the plantation system as developed
in America, and particularly in Virginia, was at first a feudal domain. On
these plantations the master was practically supreme. The slave codes in
early days were but moderately harsh, allowing punishment by the master,
but restraining him in extreme cases and providing for care of the slaves
and of the aged. With the power, however, solely in the hands of the
master class, and with the master supreme on his own plantation, his power
over the slave was practically what he wished it to be. In some cases the
cruelty was as great as on the worst West Indian plantations. In other
cases the rule was mild and paternal.

Up through this American feudalism the Negro began to rise. He learned in
the eighteenth century the English language, he began to be identified
with the Christian church, he mingled his blood to a considerable extent
with the master class. The house servants particularly were favored, in
some cases receiving education, and the number of free Negroes gradually
increased.

Present-day students are often puzzled at the apparent contradictions of
Southern slavery. One hears, on the one hand, of the staid and gentle
patriarchy, the wide and sleepy plantations with lord and retainers, ease
and happiness; on the other hand one hears of barbarous cruelty and
unbridled power and wide oppression of men. Which is the true picture? The
answer is simple: both are true. They are not opposite sides of the same
shield; they are different shields. They are pictures, on the one hand, of
house service in the great country seats and in the towns, and on the
other hand of the field laborers who raised the great tobacco, rice, and
cotton crops. We have thus not only carelessly mixed pictures of what were
really different kinds of slavery, but of that which represented different
degrees in the development of the economic system. House service was the
older feudal idea of personal retainership, developed in Virginia and
Carolina in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. It had all the
advantages and disadvantages of such a system; the advantage of the strong
personal tie and disadvantage of unyielding caste distinctions, with the
resultant immoralities. At its worst, however, it was a matter primarily
of human relationships.

Out of this older type of slavery in the northern South there developed,
during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, in the southern South the
type of slavery which corresponds to the modern factory system in its
worst conceivable form. It represented production of a staple product on a
large scale; between the owner and laborer were interposed the overseer
and the drivers. The slaves were whipped and driven to a mechanical task
system. Wide territory was needed, so that at last absentee landlordship
was common. It was this latter type of slavery that marked the cotton
kingdom, and the extension of the area of this system southward and
westward marked the aggressive world-conquering visions of the slave
barons. On the other hand it was the milder and far different Virginia
house service and the personal retainership of town life in which most
white children grew up; it was this that impressed their imaginations and
which they have so vividly portrayed. The Negroes, however, knew the other
side, for it was under the harsher, heartless driving of the fields that
fully nine-tenths of them lived.

There early began to be some internal development and growth of
self-consciousness among the Negroes: for instance, in New England towns
Negro "governors" were elected. This was partly an African custom
transplanted and partly an endeavor to put the regulation of the slaves
into their own hands. Negroes voted in those days: for instance, in North
Carolina until 1835 the Constitution extended the franchise to every
freeman, and when Negroes were disfranchised in 1835, several hundred
colored men were deprived of the vote. In fact, as Albert Bushnell Hart
says, "In the colonies freed Negroes, like freed indentured white
servants, acquired property, founded families, and came into the political
community if they had the energy, thrift, and fortune to get the necessary
property."[94]

The humanitarian movement of the eighteenth century was active toward
Negroes, because of the part which they played in the Revolutionary War.
Negro regiments and companies were raised in Connecticut and Rhode Island,
and a large number of Negroes were members of the continental armies
elsewhere. Individual Negroes distinguished themselves. It is estimated
that five thousand Negroes fought in the American armies.

The mass of the Americans considered at the time of the adoption of the
Constitution that Negro slavery was doomed. There soon came a series of
laws emancipating slaves in the North: Vermont began in 1779, followed by
judicial decision in Massachusetts in 1780 and gradual emancipation in
Pennsylvania beginning the same year; emancipation was accomplished in New
Hampshire in 1783, and in Connecticut and Rhode Island in 1784. The
momentous exclusion of slavery in the Northwest Territory took place in
1787, and gradual emancipation began in New York and New Jersey in 1799
and 1804.

Beneficial and insurance societies began to appear among colored people.
Nearly every town of any size in Virginia in the early eighteenth century
had Negro organizations for caring for the sick and burying the dead. As
the number of free Negroes increased, particularly in the North, these
financial societies began to be openly formed. One of the earliest was the
Free African Society of Philadelphia. This eventually became the present
African Methodist Church, which has to-day half a million members and over
eleven million dollars' worth of property.

Negroes began to be received into the white church bodies in separate
congregations, and before 1807 there is the record of the formation of
eight such Negro churches. This brought forth leaders who were usually
preachers in these churches. Richard Allen, the founder of the African
Methodist Church, was one; Lot Carey, one of the founders of Liberia, was
another. In the South there was John Chavis, who passed through a regular
course of studies at what is now Washington and Lee University. He started
a school for young white men in North Carolina and had among his pupils a
United States senator, sons of a chief justice of North Carolina, a
governor of the state, and many others. He was a full-blooded Negro, but a
Southern writer says that "all accounts agree that John Chavis was a
gentleman. He was received socially among the best whites and asked to
table."[95]

In the war of 1812 thirty-three hundred Negroes helped Jackson win the
battle of New Orleans, and numbers fought in New York State and in the
navy under Perry, Channing, and others. Phyllis Wheatley, a Negro girl,
wrote poetry, and the mulatto, Benjamin Banneker, published one of the
first American series of almanacs.

In fine, it seemed in the early years of the nineteenth century that
slavery in the United States would gradually disappear and that the Negro
would have, in time, a man's chance. A change came, however, between 1820
and 1830, and it is directly traceable to the industrial revolution of the
nineteenth century.

Between 1738 and 1830 there had come a remarkable series of inventions
which revolutionized the methods of making cloth. This series included the
invention of the fly shuttle, the carding machine, the steam engine, and
the power loom. The world began to look about for a cheaper and larger
supply of fiber for weaving. It was found in the cotton plant, and the
southern United States was especially adapted to its culture. The
invention of the cotton gin removed the last difficulties. The South now
had a crop which could be attended to by unskilled labor and for which
there was practically unlimited demand. There was land, and rich land, in
plenty. The result was that the cotton crop in the United States increased
from 8,000 bales in 1790 to 650,000 bales in 1820, to 2,500,000 bales in
1850, and to 4,000,000 bales in 1860.

In this growth one sees the economic foundation of the new slavery in the
United States, which rose in the second decade of the nineteenth century.
Manifestly the fatal procrastination in dealing with slavery in the
eighteenth century received in the nineteenth century its terrible reward.
The change in the attitude toward slavery was manifest in various ways.
The South no longer excused slavery, but began to defend it as an economic
system. The enforcement of the slave trade laws became notoriously lax
and there was a tendency to make slave codes harsher.

This led to retaliation on the part of the Negroes. There had not been in
the United States before this many attempts at insurrection. The slaves
were distributed over a wide territory, and before they became intelligent
enough to cooperate the chance of emancipation was held before them.
Several small insurrections are alluded to in South Carolina early in the
eighteenth century, and one by Cato at Stono in 1740 caused widespread
alarm. The Negro plot in New York in 1712 put the city into hysterics.
There was no further plotting on any scale until the Haytian revolt, when
Gabriel in Virginia made an abortive attempt. In 1822 a free Negro,
Denmark Vesey, in South Carolina, failed in a well-laid plot, and ten
years after that, in 1831, Nat Turner led his insurrection in Virginia and
killed fifty-one persons. The result of this insurrection was to
crystallize tendencies toward harshness which the economic revolution was
making advisable.

A wave of legislation passed over the South, prohibiting the slaves from
learning to read and write, forbidding Negroes to preach, and interfering
with Negro religious meetings. Virginia declared in 1831 that neither
slaves nor free Negroes might preach, nor could they attend religious
service at night without permission. In North Carolina slaves and free
Negroes were forbidden to preach, exhort, or teach "in any prayer meeting
or other association for worship where slaves of different families are
collected together" on penalty of not more than thirty-nine lashes.
Maryland and Georgia and other states had similar laws.

The real effective revolt of the Negro against slavery was not, however,
by fighting, but by running away, usually to the North, which had been
recently freed from slavery. From the beginning of the nineteenth century
slaves began to escape in considerable numbers. Four geographical paths
were chiefly followed: one, leading southward, was the line of swamps
along the coast from Norfolk, Virginia, to the northern border of Florida.
This gave rise to the Negro element among the Indians in Florida and led
to the two Seminole wars of 1817 and 1835. These wars were really slave
raids to make the Indians give up the Negro and half-breed slaves
domiciled among them. The wars cost the United States ten million dollars
and two thousand lives.

The great Appalachian range, with its abutting mountains, was the safest
path northward. Through Tennessee and Kentucky and the heart of the
Cumberland Mountains, using the limestone caverns, was the third route,
and the valley of the Mississippi was the western tunnel.

These runaways and the freedmen of the North soon began to form a group of
people who sought to consider the problem of slavery and the destiny of
the Negro in America. They passed through many psychological changes of
attitude in the years from 1700 to 1850. At first, in the early part of
the eighteenth century, there was but one thought: revolt and revenge. The
development of the latter half of the century brought an attitude of hope
and adjustment and emphasized the differences between the slave and the
free Negro. The first part of the nineteenth century brought two
movements: among the free Negroes an effort at self-development and
protection through organization; among slaves and recent fugitives a
distinct reversion to the older idea of revolt.

As the new industrial slavery, following the rise of the cotton kingdom,
began to press harder, a period of storm and stress ensued in the black
world, and in 1829 came the first full-voiced, almost hysterical protest
of a Negro against slavery and the color line in David Walker's Appeal,
which aroused Southern legislatures to action.

The decade 1830-40 was a severe period of trial. Not only were the chains
of slavery tighter in the South, but in the North the free Negro was
beginning to feel the ostracism and competition of white workingmen,
native and foreign. In Philadelphia, between 1829 and 1849, six mobs of
hoodlums and foreigners murdered and maltreated Negroes. In the Middle
West harsh black laws which had been enacted in earlier days were hauled
from their hiding places and put into effect. No Negro was allowed to
settle in Ohio unless he gave bond within twenty days to the amount of
five thousand dollars to guarantee his good behavior and support.
Harboring or concealing fugitives was heavily fined, and no Negro could
give evidence in any case where a white man was party. These laws began to
be enforced in 1829 and for three days riots went on in Cincinnati and
Negroes were shot and killed. Aroused, the Negroes sent a deputation to
Canada where they were offered asylum. Fully two thousand migrated from
Ohio. Later large numbers from other parts of the United States joined
them.

In 1830-31 the first Negro conventions were called in Philadelphia to
consider the desperate condition of the Negro population, and in 1833 the
convention met again and local societies were formed. The first Negro
paper was issued in New York in 1827, while later emancipation in the
British West Indies brought some cheer in the darkness.

A system of separate Negro schools was established and the little band of
abolitionists led by Garrison and others appeared. In spite of all the
untoward circumstances, therefore, the internal development of the free
Negro in the North went on. The Negro population increased twenty-three
per cent between 1830 and 1840; Philadelphia had, in 1838, one hundred
small beneficial societies, while Ohio Negroes had ten thousand acres of
land. The slave mutiny on the Creole, the establishment of the Negro Odd
Fellows, and the growth of the Negro churches all indicated advancement.

Between 1830 and 1850 the concerted coÃ¶peration to assist fugitives came
to be known as the Underground Railroad. It was an organization not simply
of white philanthropists, but the coÃ¶peration of Negroes in the most
difficult part of the work made it possible. Hundreds of Negroes visited
the slave states to entice the slaves away, and the list of Underground
Railroad operators given by Siebert contains one hundred and twenty-eight
names of Negroes. In Canada and in the northern United States there was a
secret society, known as the League of Freedom, which especially worked to
help slaves run away. Harriet Tubman was one of the most energetic of
these slave conductors and brought away several thousand slaves. William
Lambert, a colored man, was reputed between 1829 and 1862 to have aided in
the escape of thirty thousand.

The decade 1840-50 was a period of hope and uplift for the Negro group,
with clear evidences of distinct self-assertion and advance. A few
well-trained lawyers and physicians appeared, and colored men took their
place among the abolition orators. The catering business in Philadelphia
and other cities fell largely into their hands, and some small merchants
arose here and there. Above all, Frederick Douglass made his first speech
in 1841 and thereafter became one of the most prominent figures in the
abolition crusade. A new series of national conventions began to assemble
late in the forties, and the delegates were drawn from the artisans and
higher servants, showing a great increase of efficiency in the rank and
file of the free Negroes.

By 1850 the Negroes had increased to three and a half million. Those in
Canada were being organized in settlements and were accumulating property.
The escape of fugitive slaves was systematized and some of the most
representative conventions met. One particularly, in 1854, grappled
frankly with the problem of emigration. It looked as though it was going
to be impossible for Negroes to remain in the United States and be free.
As early as 1788 a Negro union of Newport, Rhode Island, had proposed a
general exodus to Africa. John and Paul Cuffe, after petitioning for the
right to vote in 1780, started in 1815 for Africa, organizing an
expedition at their own expense which cost four thousand dollars. Lot
Carey organized the African Mission Society in 1813, and the first Negro
college graduate went to Liberia in 1829 and became superintendent of
public schools. The Colonization Society encouraged this migration, and
the Negroes themselves had organized the Canadian exodus.

The Rochester Negro convention in 1853 pronounced against migration, but
nevertheless emissaries were sent in various directions to see what
inducements could be offered. One went to the Niger valley, one to Central
America, and one to Hayti. The Haytian trip was successful and about two
thousand black emigrants eventually settled in Hayti.

Delaney, who went to Africa, concluded a treaty with eight kings offering
inducements to Negroes, but nothing came of it. In 1853 Negroes like
Purvis and Barbadoes helped in the formation of the American Anti-slavery
society, and for a while colored men coÃ¶perated with John Brown and
probably would have given him considerable help if they had thoroughly
known his plans. As it was, six or seven of his twenty-two followers were
Negroes.

Meantime the slave power was impelled by the high price of slaves and the
exhaustion of cotton land to make increased demands. Slavery was forced
north of Mason and Dixon's line in 1820; a new slave empire with thousands
of slaves was annexed in 1850, and a fugitive slave law was passed which
endangered the liberty of every free Negro; finally a determined attempt
was made to force slavery into the Northwest in competition with free
white labor, and less effective but powerful movements arose to annex more
slave territory to the south and to reopen the African slave trade.

It looked like a triumphal march for the slave barons, but each step cost
more than the last. Missouri gave rise to the early abolitionist movement.
Mexico and the fugitive slave law aroused deep opposition in the North,
and Kansas developed an attack upon the free labor system, not simply of
the North, but of the civilized world. The result was war; but the war was
not against slavery. It was fought to protect free white laborers against
the competition of slaves, and it was thought possible to do this by
segregating slavery.

The first thing that vexed the Northern armies on Southern soil during the
war was the question of the disposition of the fugitive slaves, who
immediately began to arrive in increasing numbers. Butler confiscated
them, Fremont freed them, and Halleck caught and returned them; but their
numbers swelled to such large proportions that the mere economic problem
of their presence overshadowed everything else, especially after the
Emancipation Proclamation. Lincoln was glad to have them come after once
he realized their strength to the Confederacy.

The Emancipation Proclamation was forced, not simply by the necessity of
paralyzing industry in the South, but also by the necessity of employing
Negro soldiers. During the first two years of the war no one wanted Negro
soldiers. It was declared to be a "white man's war." General Hunter tried
to raise a regiment in South Carolina, but the War Department disavowed
the act. In Louisiana the Negroes were anxious to enlist, but were held
off. In the meantime the war did not go as well as the North had hoped,
and on the twenty-sixth of January, 1863, the Secretary of War authorized
the Governor of Massachusetts to raise two regiments of Negro troops.
Frederick Douglass and others began the work with enthusiasm, and in the
end one hundred and eighty-seven thousand Negroes enlisted in the Northern
armies, of whom seventy thousand were killed and wounded. The conduct of
these troops was exemplary. They were indispensable in camp duties and
brave on the field, where they fought in two hundred and thirteen battles.
General Banks wrote, "Their conduct was heroic. No troops could be more
determined or more daring."[96]

The assault on Fort Wagner, led by a thousand black soldiers under the
white Colonel Shaw, is one of the greatest deeds of desperate bravery on
record. On the other hand the treatment of Negro soldiers when captured by
the Confederates was barbarous. At Fort Pillow, after the surrender of the
federal troops, the colored regiment was indiscriminately butchered and
some of them were buried alive.

Abraham Lincoln said, "The slightest knowledge of arithmetic will prove to
any man that the rebel armies cannot be destroyed with Democratic
strategy. It would sacrifice all the white men of the North to do it.
There are now in the service of the United States near two hundred
thousand able-bodied colored men, most of them under arms, defending and
acquiring Union territory.... Abandon all the posts now garrisoned by
black men; take two hundred thousand men from our side and put them in the
battlefield or cornfield against us, and we would be compelled to abandon
the war in three weeks."[97] Emancipation thus came as a war measure to
break the power of the Confederacy, preserve the Union, and gain the
sympathy of the civilized world.

However, two hundred and forty-four years of slavery could not be stopped
by edict. There were legal difficulties, the whole slow problem of
economic readjustment, and the subtle and far-reaching questions of future
race relations.

The peculiar circumstances of emancipation forced the legal and political
difficulties to the front, and these were so striking that they have since
obscured the others in the eyes of students. Quite unexpectedly and
without forethought the nation had emancipated four million slaves. Once
the deed was done, the majority of the nation was glad and recognized that
this was, after all, the only result of a fearful four years' war which in
any degree justified it. But how was the result to be secured for all
time? There were three possibilities: (1) to declare the slave free and
leave him at the mercy of his former masters; (2) to establish a careful
government guardianship designed to guide the slave from legal to real
economic freedom; (3) to give the Negro the political power to guard
himself as well as he could during this development. It is very easy to
forget that the United States government tried each one of these in
succession and was literally forced to adopt the third, because the first
had utterly failed and the second was thought too "paternal" and
especially too costly. To leave the Negroes helpless after a paper edict
of emancipation was manifestly impossible. It would have meant that the
war had been fought in vain.

Carl Schurz, who traversed the South just after the war, said, "A
veritable reign of terror prevailed in many parts of the South. The Negro
found scant justice in the local courts against the white man. He could
look for protection only to the military forces of the United States still
garrisoning the states lately in rebellion and to the Freedmen's
Bureau."[98] This Freedmen's Bureau was proposed by Charles Sumner. If it
had been presented to-day instead of fifty years ago, it would have been
regarded as a proposal far less revolutionary than the state insurance of
England and Germany. A half century ago, however, and in a country which
gave the _laisser faire_ economics their extremest trial, the Freedmen's
Bureau struck the whole nation as unthinkable, save as a very temporary
expedient and to relieve the more pointed forms of distress following war.
Yet the proposals of the Bureau were both simple and sensible:

1. To oversee the making and enforcement of wage contracts for freedmen.

2. To appear in the courts as the freedmen's best friend.

3. To furnish the freedmen with a minimum of land and of capital.

4. To establish schools.

5. To furnish such institutions of relief as hospitals, outdoor relief
stations, etc.

How a sensible people could expect really to conduct a slave into freedom
with less than this it is hard to see. Even with such tutelage extending
over a period of two or three decades, the ultimate end had to be
enfranchisement and political and social freedom for those freedmen who
attained a certain set standard. Otherwise the whole training had neither
object nor guarantee. Precisely on this account the former masters opposed
the Freedmen's Bureau with all their influence. They did not want the
Negro trained or really freed, and they criticized mercilessly the many
mistakes of the new Bureau.

The North at first thought to pay for the main cost of the Freedmen's
Bureau by confiscating the property of former slave owners; but finding
this not in accordance with law, they realized that they were embarking on
an enterprise which bade fair to add many millions to the already
staggering cost of the war. When, therefore, they saw that the abolition
of slavery could not be left to the white South and could not be done by
the North without time and money, they determined to put the
responsibility on the Negro himself. This was without a doubt a tremendous
experiment, but with all its manifest mistakes it succeeded to an
astonishing degree. It made the immediate reÃ«stablishment of the old
slavery impossible, and it was probably the only quick method of doing
this. It gave the freedmen's sons a chance to begin their education. It
diverted the energy of the white South slavery to the recovery of
political power, and in this interval, small as it was, the Negro took his
first steps toward economic freedom.

The difficulties that stared reconstruction politicians in the face were
these: (1) They must act quickly. (2) Emancipation had increased the
political power of the South by one-sixth. Could this increased political
power be put in the hands of those who, in defense of slavery, had
disrupted the Union? (3) How was the abolition of slavery to be made
effective? (4) What was to be the political position of the freedmen?

The Freedmen's Bureau in its short life accomplished a great task. Carl
Schurz, in 1865, felt warranted in saying that "not half of the labor that
has been done in the South this year, or will be done there next year,
would have been or would be done but for the exertions of the Freedmen's
Bureau.... No other agency except one placed there by the national
government could have wielded that moral power whose interposition was so
necessary to prevent Southern society from falling at once into the chaos
of a general collision between its different elements."[99]
Notwithstanding this the Bureau was temporary, was regarded as a
makeshift, and soon abandoned.

Meantime partial Negro suffrage seemed not only just, but almost
inevitable. Lincoln, in 1864, "cautiously" suggested to Louisiana's
private consideration "whether some of the colored people may not be let
in as, for instance, the very intelligent, and especially those who fought
gallantly in our ranks. They would probably help in some trying time to
come, to keep the jewel of liberty in the family of freedom." Indeed, the
"family of freedom" in Louisiana being somewhat small just then, who else
was to be intrusted with the "jewel"? Later and for different reasons
Johnson, in 1865, wrote to Mississippi, "If you could extend the elective
franchise to all persons of color who can read the Constitution of the
United States in English and write their name, and to all persons of color
who own real estate valued at not less than two hundred and fifty dollars,
and pay taxes thereon, you would completely disarm the adversary and set
an example the other states will follow. This you can do with perfect
safety, and you thus place the Southern States, in reference to free
persons of color, upon the same basis with the free states. I hope and
trust your convention will do this."

The Negroes themselves began to ask for the suffrage. The Georgia
convention in Augusta (1866) advocated "a proposition to give those who
could write and read well and possessed a certain property qualification
the right of suffrage." The reply of the South to these suggestions was
decisive. In Tennessee alone was any action attempted that even suggested
possible Negro suffrage in the future, and that failed. In all other
states the "Black Codes" adopted were certainly not reassuring to the
friends of freedom. To be sure, it was not a time to look for calm, cool,
thoughtful action on the part of the white South. Their economic condition
was pitiable, their fear of Negro freedom genuine. Yet it was reasonable
to expect from them something less than repression and utter reaction
toward slavery. To some extent this expectation was fulfilled. The
abolition of slavery was recognized on the statute book, and the civil
rights of owning property and appearing as a witness in cases in which he
was a party were generally granted the Negro; yet with these in many cases
went harsh and unbearable regulations which largely neutralized the
concessions and certainly gave ground for an assumption that, once free,
the South would virtually reenslave the Negro. The colored people
themselves naturally feared this, protesting, as in Mississippi, "against
the reactionary policy prevailing and expressing the fear that the
legislature will pass such prescriptive laws as will drive the freedmen
from the state, or practically reÃ«nslave them."

The codes spoke for themselves. As Burgess says, "Almost every act, word,
or gesture of the Negro, not consonant with good taste and good manners as
well as good morals, was made a crime or misdemeanor for which he could
first be fined by the magistrates and then be consigned to a condition of
almost slavery for an indefinite time, if he could not pay the bill."[100]

All things considered, it seems probable that, if the South had been
permitted to have its way in 1865, the harshness of Negro slavery would
have been mitigated so as to make slave trading difficult, and so as to
make it possible for a Negro to hold property and appear in some cases in
court; but that in most other respects the blacks would have remained in
slavery.

What could prevent this? A Freedmen's Bureau established for ten, twenty,
or forty years, with a careful distribution of land and capital and a
system of education for the children, might have prevented such an
extension of slavery. But the country would not listen to such a
comprehensive plan. A restricted grant of the suffrage voluntarily made by
the states would have been a reassuring proof of a desire to treat the
freedmen fairly and would have balanced in part, at least, the increased
political power of the South. There was no such disposition evident.

In Louisiana, for instance, under the proposed reconstruction "not one
Negro was allowed to vote, though at that very time the wealthy
intelligent free colored people of the state paid taxes on property
assessed at fifteen million dollars and many of them were well known for
their patriotic zeal and love for the Union."[101]

Thus the arguments for universal Negro suffrage from the start were strong
and are still strong, and no one would question their strength were it not
for the assumption that the experiment failed. Frederick Douglass said to
President Johnson, "Your noble and humane predecessor placed in our hands
the sword to assist in saving the nation, and we do hope that you, his
able successor, will favorably regard the placing in our hands the ballot
with which to save ourselves."[102]

Carl Schurz wrote, "It is idle to say that it will be time to speak of
Negro suffrage when the whole colored race will be educated, for the
ballot may be necessary to him to secure his education."[103]

The granting of full Negro suffrage meant one of two alternatives to the
South: (1) The uplift of the Negro for sheer self-preservation. This is
what Schurz and the saner North expected. As one Southern school
superintendent said, "The elevation of this class is a matter of prime
importance, since a ballot in the hands of a black citizen is quite as
potent as in the hands of a white one." Or (2) Negro suffrage meant a
determined concentration of Southern effort by actual force to deprive the
Negro of the ballot or nullify its use. This last is what really happened.
But even in this case, so much energy was taken in keeping the Negro from
voting that the plan for keeping him in virtual slavery and denying him
education partially failed. It took ten years to nullify Negro suffrage in
part and twenty years to escape the fear of federal intervention. In these
twenty years a vast number of Negroes had arisen so far as to escape
slavery forever. Debt peonage could be fastened on part of the rural South
and was; but even here the new Negro landholder appeared. Thus despite
everything the Fifteenth Amendment, and that alone, struck the death knell
of slavery.

The steps toward the Fifteenth Amendment were taken slowly. First Negroes
were allowed to take part in reconstructing the state governments. This
was inevitable if loyal governments were to be obtained. Next the restored
state governments were directed to enfranchise all citizens, black or
white, or have their representation in Congress cut down proportionately.
Finally the United States said the last word of simple justice: the states
may regulate the suffrage, but no state may deprive a person of the right
to vote simply because he is a Negro or has been a slave.

For such reasons the Negro was enfranchised. What was the result? No
language has been spared to describe these results as the worst
imaginable. This is not true. There were bad results, and bad results
arising from Negro suffrage; but those results were not so bad as usually
painted, nor was Negro suffrage the prime cause of many of them. Let us
not forget that the white South believed it to be of vital interest to its
welfare that the experiment of Negro suffrage should fail ignominiously
and that almost to a man the whites were willing to insure this failure
either by active force or passive acquiescence; that besides this there
were, as might be expected, men, black and white, Northern and Southern,
only too eager to take advantage of such a situation for feathering their
own nests. Much evil must result in such case; but to charge the evil to
Negro suffrage is unfair. It may be charged to anger, poverty, venality,
and ignorance, but the anger and poverty were the almost inevitable
aftermath of war; the venality was much greater among whites than Negroes
both North and South, and while ignorance was the curse of Negroes, the
fault was not theirs and they took the initiative to correct it.

The chief charges against the Negro governments are extravagance, theft,
and incompetency of officials. There is no serious charge that these
governments threatened civilization or the foundations of social order.
The charge is that they threatened property and that they were
inefficient. These charges are in part undoubtedly true, but they are
often exaggerated. The South had been terribly impoverished and saddled
with new social burdens. In other words, states with smaller resources
were asked not only to do a work of restoration, but a larger social
work. The property holders were aghast. They not only demurred, but,
predicting ruin and revolution, they appealed to secret societies, to
intimidation, force, and murder. They refused to believe that these
novices in government and their friends were aught but scamps and fools.
Under the circumstances occurring directly after the war, the wisest
statesman would have been compelled to resort to increased taxation and
would have, in turn, been execrated as extravagant, dishonest, and
incompetent. It is easy, therefore, to see what flaming and incredible
stories of Reconstruction governments could gain wide currency and belief.
In fact the extravagance, although great, was not universal, and much of
it was due to the extravagant spirit pervading the whole country in a day
of inflated currency and speculation.

That the Negroes led by the astute thieves, became at first tools and
received some small share of the spoils is true. But two considerations
must be added: much of the legislation which resulted in fraud was
represented to the Negroes as good legislation, and thus their votes were
secured by deliberate misrepresentation. Take, for instance, the land
frauds of South Carolina. A wise Negro leader of that state, advocating
the state purchase of farm lands, said, "One of the greatest of slavery
bulwarks was the infernal plantation system, one man owning his thousand,
another his twenty, another fifty thousand acres of land. This is the only
way by which we will break up that system, and I maintain that our freedom
will be of no effect if we allow it to continue. What is the main cause of
the prosperity of the North? It is because every man has his own farm and
is free and independent. Let the lands of the South be similarly
divided."[104]

From such arguments the Negroes were induced to aid a scheme to buy land
and distribute it. Yet a large part of eight hundred thousand dollars
appropriated was wasted and went to the white landholders' pockets.

The most inexcusable cheating of the Negroes took place through the
Freedmen's Bank. This bank was incorporated by Congress in 1865 and had in
its list of incorporators some of the greatest names in America including
Peter Cooper, William Cullen Bryan and John Jay. Yet the bank was allowed
to fail in 1874 owing the freedmen their first savings of over three
millions of dollars. They have never been reimbursed.

Many Negroes were undoubtedly venal, but more were ignorant and deceived.
The question is: Did they show any signs of a disposition to learn to
better things? The theory of democratic government is not that the will of
the people is always right, but rather that normal human beings of average
intelligence will, if given a chance, learn the right and best course by
bitter experience. This is precisely what the Negro voters showed
indubitable signs of doing. First they strove for schools to abolish
ignorance, and second, a large and growing number of them revolted against
the extravagance and stealing that marred the beginning of Reconstruction,
and joined with the best elements to institute reform. The greatest stigma
on the white South is not that it opposed Negro suffrage and resented
theft and incompetence, but that, when it saw the reform movements growing
and even in some cases triumphing, and a larger and larger number of black
voters learning to vote for honesty and ability, it still preferred a
Reign of Terror to a campaign of education and disfranchised Negroes
instead of punishing rascals.

No one has expressed this more convincingly than a Negro who was himself a
member of the Reconstruction legislature of South Carolina, and who spoke
at the convention which disfranchised him against one of the onslaughts of
Tillman. "We were eight years in power. We had built school houses,
established charitable institutions, built and maintained the penitentiary
system, provided for the education of the deaf and dumb, rebuilt the jails
and court houses, rebuilt the bridges, and reestablished the ferries. In
short, we had reconstructed the state and placed it upon the road to
prosperity, and at the same time, by our acts of financial reform,
transmitted to the Hampton government an indebtedness not greater by more
than two and a half million dollars than was the bonded debt of the state
in 1868, before the Republican Negroes and their white allies came into
power."[105]

So, too, in Louisiana in 1872, and in Mississippi later, the better
element of the Republicans triumphed at the polls and, joining with the
Democrats, instituted reforms, repudiated the worst extravagance, and
started toward better things. Unfortunately there was one thing that the
white South feared more than Negro dishonesty, ignorance, and
incompetency, and that was Negro honesty, knowledge, and efficiency.

In the midst of all these difficulties the Negro governments in the South
accomplished much of positive good. We may recognize three things which
Negro rule gave to the South: (1) democratic government, (2) free public
schools, (3) new social legislation.

In general, the words of Judge Albion W. Tourgee, a white "carpet bagger,"
are true when he says of the Negro governments, "They obeyed the
Constitution of the United States and annulled the bonds of states,
counties, and cities which had been issued to carry on the War of
Rebellion and maintain armies in the field against the Union. They
instituted a public school system in a realm where public schools had been
unknown. They opened the ballot box and the jury box to thousands of white
men who had been debarred from them by a lack of earthly possessions. They
introduced home rule into the South. They abolished the whipping post, the
branding iron, the stocks, and other barbarous forms of punishment which
had up to that time prevailed. They reduced capital felonies from about
twenty to two or three. In an age of extravagance they were extravagant in
the sums appropriated for public works. In all of that time no man's
rights of persons were invaded under the forms of law. Every Democrat's
life, home, fireside, and business were safe. No man obstructed any white
man's way to the ballot box, interfered with his freedom of speech, or
boycotted him on account of his political faith."[106]

A thorough study of the legislation accompanying these constitutions and
its changes since shows the comparatively small amount of change in law
and government which the overthrow of Negro rule brought about. There were
sharp and often hurtful economies introduced, marking the return of
property to power; there was a sweeping change of officials, but the main
body of Reconstruction legislation stood. The Reconstruction democracy
brought forth new leaders and definitely overthrew the old Southern
aristocracy. Among these new men were Negroes of worth and ability. John
R. Lynch, when Speaker of the Mississippi House of Representatives, was
given a public testimonial by Republicans and Democrats, and the leading
white paper said, "His bearing in office had been so proper, and his
rulings in such marked contrasts to the partisan conduct of the ignoble
whites of his party who have aspired to be leaders of the blacks, that the
conservatives cheerfully joined in the testimonial."[107]

Of the colored treasurer of South Carolina the white Governor Chamberlain
said, "I have never heard one word or seen one act of Mr. Cardoza's which
did not confirm my confidence in his personal integrity and his political
honor and zeal for the honest administration of the state government. On
every occasion, and under all circumstances, he has been against fraud and
robbery and in favor of good measures and good men."[108]

Jonathan C. Gibbs, a colored man and the first state superintendent of
instruction in Florida, was a graduate of Dartmouth. He established the
system and brought it to success, dying in harness in 1874. Such men--and
there were others--ought not to be forgotten or confounded with other
types of colored and white Reconstruction leaders.

There is no doubt that the thirst of the black man for knowledge, a thirst
which has been too persistent and durable to be mere curiosity or whim,
gave birth to the public school system of the South. It was the question
upon which black voters and legislators insisted more than anything else,
and while it is possible to find some vestiges of free schools in some of
the Southern States before the war, yet a universal, well-established
system dates from the day that the black man got political power.

Finally, in legislation covering property, the wider functions of the
state, the punishment of crime and the like, it is sufficient to say that
the laws on these points established by Reconstruction legislatures were
not only different from and even revolutionary to the laws in the older
South, but they were so wise and so well suited to the needs of the new
South that, in spite of a retrogressive movement following the overthrow
of the Negro governments, the mass of this legislation, with elaborations
and development, still stands on the statute books of the South.[109]

The triumph of reaction in the South inaugurated a new era in which we may
distinguish three phases: the renewed attempt to reduce the Negroes to
serfdom, the rise of the Negro metayer, and the economic disfranchisement
of the Southern working class.

The attempt to replace individual slavery had been frustrated by the
Freedmen's Bureau and the Fifteenth Amendment. The disfranchisement of
1876 was followed by the widespread rise of "crime" peonage. Stringent
laws on vagrancy, guardianship, and labor contracts were enacted and large
discretion given judge and jury in cases of petty crime. As a result
Negroes were systematically arrested on the slightest pretext and the
labor of convicts leased to private parties. This "convict lease system"
was almost universal in the South until about 1890, when its outrageous
abuses and cruelties aroused the whole country. It still survives over
wide areas, and is not only responsible for the impression that the Negro
is a natural criminal, but also for the inability of the Southern courts
to perform their normal functions after so long a prostitution to ends far
removed from justice.

In more normal economic lines the employers began with the labor contract
system. Before the war they owned labor, land, and subsistence. After the
war they still held the land and subsistence. The laborer was hired and
the subsistence "advanced" to him while the crop was growing. The fall of
the Freedmen's Bureau hindered the transmutation of this system into a
modern wage system, and allowed the laborers to be cheated by high
interest charges on the subsistence advanced and actual cheating often in
book accounts.

The black laborers became deeply dissatisfied under this system and began
to migrate from the country to the cities, where there was an increasing
demand for labor. The employing farmers complained bitterly of the
scarcity of labor and of Negro "laziness," and secured the enactment of
harsher vagrancy and labor contract laws, and statutes against the
"enticement" of laborers. So severe were these laws that it was often
impossible for a laborer to stop work without committing a felony.
Nevertheless competition compelled the landholders to offer more
inducements to the farm hand. The result was the rise of the black share
tenant: the laborer securing better wages saved a little capital and began
to hire land in parcels of forty to eighty acres, furnishing his own tools
and seed and practically raising his own subsistence. In this way the
whole face of the labor contract in the South was, in the decade 1880-90,
in process of change from a nominal wage contract to a system of tenantry.
The great plantations were apparently broken up into forty and eighty acre
farms with black farmers. To many it seemed that emancipation was
accomplished, and the black folk were especially filled with joy and hope.

It soon was evident, however, that the change was only partial. The
landlord still held the land in large parcels. He rented this in small
farms to tenants, but retained direct control. In theory the laborer was
furnishing capital, but in the majority of cases he was borrowing at
least a part of this capital from some merchant.

The retail merchant in this way entered on the scene as middle man between
landlord and laborer. He guaranteed the landowner his rent and relieved
him of details by taking over the furnishing of supplies to the laborer.
He tempted the laborer by a larger stock of more attractive goods, made a
direct contract with him, and took a mortgage on the growing crop. Thus he
soon became the middle man to whom the profit of the transaction largely
flowed, and he began to get rich.

If the new system benefited the merchant and the landlord, it also brought
some benefits to the black laborers. Numbers of these were still held in
peonage, and the mass were laborers working for scant board and clothes;
but above these began to rise a large number of independent tenants and
farm owners.

In 1890, therefore, the South was faced by this question: Are we willing
to allow the Negro to advance as a free worker, peasant farmer, metayer,
and small capitalist, with only such handicaps as naturally impede the
poor and ignorant, or is it necessary to erect further artificial barriers
to restrain the advance of the Negroes? The answer was clear and
unmistakable. The advance of the freedmen had been too rapid and the South
feared it; every effort must be made to "keep the Negro in his place" as a
servile caste.

To this end the South strove to make the disfranchisement of the Negroes
effective and final. Up to this time disfranchisement was illegal and
based on intimidation. The new laws passed between 1890 and 1910 sought on
their face to base the right to vote on property and education in such a
way as to exclude poor and illiterate Negroes and admit all whites. In
fact they could be administered so as to exclude nearly all Negroes. To
this was added a series of laws designed publicly to humiliate and
stigmatize Negro blood: as, for example, separate railway cars; separate
seats in street cars, and the like; these things were added to the
separation in schools and churches, and the denial of redress to seduced
colored women, which had long been the custom in the South. All these new
enactments meant not simply separation, but subordination, caste,
humiliation, and flagrant injustice.

To all this was added a series of labor laws making the exploitation of
Negro labor more secure. All this legislation had to be accomplished in
the face of the labor movement throughout the world, and particularly in
the South, where it was beginning to enter among the white workers. This
was accomplished easily, however, by an appeal to race prejudice. No
method of inflaming the darkest passions of men was unused. The lynching
mob was given its glut of blood and egged on by purposely exaggerated and
often wholly invented tales of crime on the part of perhaps the most
peaceful and sweet-tempered race the world has ever known. Under the flame
of this outward noise went the more subtle and dangerous work. The
election laws passed in the states where three-fourths of the Negroes
live, were so ingeniously framed that a black university graduate could be
prevented from voting and the most ignorant white hoodlum could be
admitted to the polls. Labor laws were so arranged that imprisonment for
debt was possible and leaving an employer could be made a penitentiary
offense. Negro schools were cut off with small appropriations or wholly
neglected, and a determined effort was made with wide success to see that
no Negro had any voice either in the making or the administration of
local, state, or national law.

The acquiescence of the white labor vote of the South was further insured
by throwing white and black laborers, so far as possible, into rival
competing groups and making each feel that the one was the cause of the
other's troubles. The neutrality of the white people of the North was
secured through their fear for the safety of large investments in the
South, and through the fatalistic attitude common both in America and
Europe toward the possibility of real advance on the part of the darker
nations.

The reaction of the Negro Americans upon this wholesale and open attempt
to reduce them to serfdom has been interesting. Naturally they began to
organize and protest and in some cases to appeal to the courts. Then, to
their astonishment, there arose a colored leader, Mr. Booker T.
Washington, who advised them to yield to disfranchisement and caste and
wait for greater economic strength and general efficiency before demanding
full rights as American citizens. The white South naturally agreed with
Mr. Washington, and the white North thought they saw here a chance for
peace in the racial conflict and safety for their Southern investments.

For a time the colored people hesitated. They respected Mr. Washington for
shrewdness and recognized the wisdom of his homely insistence on thrift
and hard work; but gradually they came to see more and more clearly that,
stripped of political power and emasculated by caste, they could never
gain sufficient economic strength to take their place as modern men. They
also realized that any lull in their protests would be taken advantage of
by Negro haters to push their caste program. They began, therefore, with
renewed persistence to fight for their fundamental rights as American
citizens. The struggle tended at first to bitter personal dissension
within the group. But wiser counsels and the advice of white friends
eventually prevailed and raised it to the broad level of a fight for the
fundamental principles of democracy. The launching of the "Niagara
Movement" by twenty-nine daring colored men in 1905, followed by the
formation of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored
People in 1910, marked an epoch in the advance of the Negro. This latter
organization, with its monthly organ, _The Crisis_, is now waging a
nation-wide fight for justice to Negroes. Other organizations, and a
number of strong Negro weekly papers are aiding in this fight. What has
been the net result of this struggle of half a century?

In 1863 there were about five million persons of Negro descent in the
United States. Of these, four million and more were just being released
from slavery. These slaves could be bought and sold, could move from place
to place only with permission, were forbidden to learn to read or write,
and legally could never hold property or marry. Ninety per cent were
totally illiterate, and only one adult in six was a nominal Christian.

Fifty years later, in 1913, there were in the United States ten and a
quarter million persons of Negro descent, an increase of one hundred and
five per cent. Legal slavery has been abolished leaving, however, vestiges
in debt slavery, peonage, and the convict lease system. The mass of the
freedmen and their sons have

1. Earned a living as free and partially free laborers.

2. Shared the responsibilities of government.

3. Developed the internal organization of their race.

4. Aspired to spiritual self-expression.

The Negro was freed as a penniless, landless, naked, ignorant laborer.
There were a few free Negroes who owned property in the South, and a
larger number who owned property in the North; but ninety-nine per cent of
the race in the South were penniless field hands and servants.

To-day there are two and a half million laborers, the majority of whom are
efficient wage earners. Above these are more than a million servants and
tenant farmers; skilled and semi-skilled workers make another million and
at the top of the economic column are 600,000 owners and managers of farms
and businesses, cash tenants, officials, and professional men. This makes
a total of 5,192,535 colored breadwinners in 1910.

More specifically these breadwinners include 218,972 farm owners and
319,346 cash farm tenants and managers. There were in all 62,755 miners,
288,141 in the building and hand trades; 28,515 workers in clay, glass,
and stone; 41,739 iron and steel workers; 134,102 employees on railways;
62,822 draymen, cab drivers, and liverymen; 133,245 in wholesale and
retail trade; 32,170 in the public service; and 69,471 in professional
service, including 29,750 teachers, 17,495 clergymen, and 4,546
physicians, dentists, trained nurses, etc. Finally, we must not forget
2,175,000 Negro homes, with their housewives, and 1,620,000 children in
school.

Fifty years ago the overwhelming mass of these people were not only
penniless, but were themselves assessed as real estate. By 1875 the
Negroes probably had gotten hold of something between 2,000,000 and
4,000,000 acres of land through their bounties as soldiers and the low
price of land after the war. By 1880 this was increased to about 6,000,000
acres; in 1890 to about 8,000,000 acres; in 1900 to over 12,000,000 acres.
In 1910 this land had increased to nearly 20,000,000 acres, a realm as
large as Ireland.

The 120,738 farms owned by Negroes in 1890 increased to 218,972 in 1910,
or eighty-one per cent. The value of these farms increased from
$179,796,639 in 1900 to $440,992,439 in 1910; Negroes owned in 1910 about
500,000 homes out of a total of 2,175,000. Their total property in 1900
was estimated at $300,000,000 by the American Economic Association. On the
same basis of calculation it would be worth to-day not less than
$800,000,000.

Despite the disfranchisement of three-fourths of his voting population,
the Negro to-day is a recognized part of the American government. He holds
7,500 offices in the executive service of the nation, besides furnishing
four regiments in the army and a large number of sailors. In the state and
municipal service he holds nearly 20,000 other offices, and he furnishes
500,000 of the votes which rule the Union.

In these same years the Negro has relearned the lost art of organization.
Slavery was the almost absolute denial of initiative and responsibility.
To-day Negroes have nearly 40,000 churches, with edifices worth at least
$75,000,000 and controlling nearly 4,000,000 members. They raise
themselves $7,500,000 a year for these churches.

There are 200 private schools and colleges managed and almost entirely
supported by Negroes, and these and other public and private Negro schools
have received in 40 years $45,000,000 of Negro money in taxes and
donations. Five millions a year are raised by Negro secret and beneficial
societies which hold at least $6,000,000 in real estate. Negroes support
wholly or in part over 100 old folks' homes and orphanages, 30 hospitals,
and 500 cemeteries. Their organized commercial life is extending rapidly
and includes over 22,000 small retail businesses and 40 banks.

Above and beyond this material growth has gone the spiritual uplift of a
great human race. From contempt and amusement they have passed to the
pity, perplexity, and fear on the part of their neighbors, while within
their own souls they have arisen from apathy and timid complaint to open
protest and more and more manly self-assertion. Where nine-tenths of them
could not read or write in 1860, to-day over two-thirds can; they have 300
papers and periodicals, and their voice and expression are compelling
attention. Already in poetry, literature, music, and painting the work of
Americans of Negro descent has gained notable recognition. Instead of
being led and defended by others, as in the past, American Negroes are
gaining their own leaders, their own voices, their own ideals.
Self-realization is thus coming slowly but surely to another of the
world's great races, and they are to-day girding themselves to fight in
the van of progress, not simply for their own rights as men, but for the
ideals of the greater world in which they live: the emancipation of women,
universal peace, democratic government, the socialization of wealth, and
human brotherhood.

FOOTNOTES:

[90]

The figures given by the census are as follows:
1850, mulattoes formed 11.2 per cent of the total Negro population.
1860, mulattoes formed 13.2 per cent of the total Negro population.
1870, mulattoes formed 12 per cent of the total Negro population.
1890, mulattoes formed 15.2 per cent of the total Negro population.
1910, mulattoes formed 20.9 per cent of the total Negro population.

Or in actual numbers:
1850, 405,751 mulattoes.
1860, 588,352 mulattoes.
1870, 585,601 mulattoes.
1890, 1,132,060 mulattoes.
1910, 2,050,686 mulattoes.

[91] Cf. "The Spanish Jurist Solorzaris," quoted in Helps: _Spanish
Conquest_, IV, 381.

[92] Hurd: _Law of Freedom and Bondage_.

[93] "Obi (Obeah, Obiah, or Obia) is the adjective; Obe or Obi, the noun.
It is of African origin, probably connected with Egyptian Ob, Aub, or
Obron, meaning 'serpent.' Moses forbids Israelites ever to consult the
demon Ob, i.e., 'Charmer, Wizard.' The Witch of Endor is called Oub or Ob.
Oubaois is the name of the Baselisk or Royal Serpent, emblem of the Sun,
and, according to Horus Appollo, 'the Ancient Deity of Africa.'"--Edwards:
_West Indies_, ed. 1819, II. 106-119. Cf. Johnston: _Negro in the New
World_, pp. 65-66; _also Atlanta University Publications_, No. 8, pp. 5-6.

[94] _Boston Transcript_, March 24, 1906.

[95] Bassett: _North Carolina_, pp. 73-76.

[96] Cf. Wilson: _The Black Phalanx_.

[97] Wilson: _The Black Phalanx_, p. 108.

[98] _American Historical Review_, Vol. XV.

[99] Report to President Johnson.

[100] _Reconstruction and the Constitution._

[101] Brewster: _Sketches_, etc.

[102] McPherson: _Reconstruction_, p. 52.

[103] Report to the President, 1865.

[104] _American Historical Review_, Vol. XV, No. 4.

[105] _Occasional Papers_, American Negro Academy, No. 6.

[106] _Occasional Papers_, American Negro Academy, No. 6.

[107] _Jackson (Miss.) Clarion_, April 24, 1873.

[108] Allen: _Governor Chamberlain's Administration_, p. 82.

[109] Reconstruction Constitutions, practically unaltered, were kept in
Florida, 1868-85, seventeen years; Virginia, 1870-1902, thirty-two years;
South Carolina, 1868-95, twenty-seven years; Mississippi, 1868-90,
twenty-two years.




XII THE NEGRO PROBLEMS


It is impossible to separate the population of the world accurately by
race, since that is no scientific criterion by which to divide races. If
we divide the world, however, roughly into African Negroes and Negroids,
European whites, and Asiatic and American brown and yellow peoples, we
have approximately 150,000,000 Negroes, 500,000,000 whites, and
900,000,000 yellow and brown peoples. Of the 150,000,000 Negroes,
121,000,000 live in Africa, 27,000,000[110] in the new world, and
2,000,000 in Asia.

What is to be the future relation of the Negro race to the rest of the
world? The visitor from Altruria might see here no peculiar problem. He
would expect the Negro race to develop along the lines of other human
races. In Africa his economic and political development would restore and
eventually outrun the ancient glories of Egypt, Ethiopia, and Yoruba;
overseas the West Indies would become a new and nobler Africa, built in
the very pathway of the new highway of commerce between East and West--the
real sea route to India; while in the United States a large part of its
citizenship (showing for perhaps centuries their dark descent, but
nevertheless equal sharers of and contributors to the civilization of the
West) would be the descendants of the wretched victims of the seventeenth,
eighteenth, and nineteenth century slave trade.

This natural assumption of a stranger finds, however, lodging in the minds
of few present-day thinkers. On the contrary, such an outcome is usually
dismissed summarily. Most persons have accepted that tacit but clear
modern philosophy which assigns to the white race alone the hegemony of
the world and assumes that other races, and particularly the Negro race,
will either be content to serve the interests of the whites or die out
before their all-conquering march. This philosophy is the child of the
African slave trade and of the expansion of Europe during the nineteenth
century.

The Negro slave trade was the first step in modern world commerce,
followed by the modern theory of colonial expansion. Slaves as an article
of commerce were shipped as long as the traffic paid. When the Americas
had enough black laborers for their immediate demand, the moral action of
the eighteenth century had a chance to make its faint voice heard.

The moral repugnance was powerfully reÃ«nforced by the revolt of the slaves
in the West Indies and South America, and by the fact that North America
early began to regard itself as the seat of advanced ideas in politics,
religion, and humanity.

Finally European capital began to find better investments than slave
shipping and flew to them. These better investments were the fruit of the
new industrial revolution of the nineteenth century, with its factory
system; they were also in part the result of the cheapened price of gold
and silver, brought about by slavery and the slave trade to the new world.
Commodities other than gold, and commodities capable of manufacture and
exploitation in Europe out of materials furnishable by America, became
enhanced in value; the bottom fell out of the commercial slave trade and
its suppression became possible.

The middle of the nineteenth century saw the beginning of the rise of the
modern working class. By means of political power the laborers slowly but
surely began to demand a larger share in the profiting industry. In the
United States their demand bade fair to be halted by the competition of
slave labor. The labor vote, therefore, first confined slavery to limits
in which it could not live, and when the slave power sought to exceed
these territorial limits, it was suddenly and unintentionally abolished.

As the emancipation of millions of dark workers took place in the West
Indies, North and South America, and parts of Africa at this time, it was
natural to assume that the uplift of this working class lay along the same
paths with that of European and American whites. This was the _first_
suggested solution of the Negro problem. Consequently these Negroes
received partial enfranchisement, the beginnings of education, and some of
the elementary rights of wage earners and property holders, while the
independence of Liberia and Hayti was recognized. However, long before
they were strong enough to assert the rights thus granted or to gather
intelligence enough for proper group leadership, the new colonialism of
the later nineteenth and twentieth centuries began to dawn. The new
colonial theory transferred the reign of commercial privilege and
extraordinary profit from the exploitation of the European working class
to the exploitation of backward races under the political domination of
Europe. For the purpose of carrying out this idea the European and white
American working class was practically invited to share in this new
exploitation, and particularly were flattered by popular appeals to their
inherent superiority to "Dagoes," "Chinks," "Japs," and "Niggers."

This tendency was strengthened by the fact that the new colonial expansion
centered in Africa. Thus in 1875 something less than one-tenth of Africa
was under nominal European control, but the Franco-Prussian War and the
exploration of the Congo led to new and fateful things. Germany desired
economic expansion and, being shut out from America by the Monroe
Doctrine, turned to Africa. France, humiliated in war, dreamed of an
African empire from the Atlantic to the Red Sea. Italy became ambitious
for Tripoli and Abyssinia. Great Britain began to take new interest in her
African realm, but found herself largely checkmated by the jealousy of all
Europe. Portugal sought to make good her ancient claim to the larger part
of the whole southern peninsula. It was Leopold of Belgium who started to
make the exploration and civilization of Africa an international movement.
This project failed, and the Congo Free State became in time simply a
Belgian colony. While the project was under discussion, the international
scramble for Africa began. As a result the Berlin Conference and
subsequent wars and treaties gave Great Britain control of 2,101,411
square miles of African territory, in addition to Egypt and the Egyptian
Sudan with 1,600,000 square miles. This includes South Africa,
Bechuanaland and Rhodesia, East Africa, Uganda and Zanzibar, Nigeria, and
British West Africa. The French hold 4,106,950 square miles, including
nearly all North Africa (except Tripoli) west of the Niger valley and
Libyan Desert, and touching the Atlantic at four points. To this is added
the Island of Madagascar. The Germans have 910,150 square miles,
principally in Southeast and South-west Africa and the Kamerun. The
Portuguese retain 787,500 square miles in Southeast and Southwest Africa.
The Belgians have 900,000 square miles, while Liberia (43,000 square
miles) and Abyssinia (350,000 square miles) are independent. The Italians
have about 600,000 square miles and the Spanish less than 100,000 square
miles.

This partition of Africa brought revision of the ideas of Negro uplift.
Why was it necessary, the European investors argued, to push a continent
of black workers along the paths of social uplift by education,
trades-unionism, property holding, and the electoral franchise when the
workers desired no change, and the rate of European profit would suffer?

There quickly arose then the _second_ suggestion for settling the Negro
problem. It called for the virtual enslavement of natives in certain
industries, as rubber and ivory collecting in the Belgian Congo, cocoa
raising in Portuguese Angola, and diamond mining in South Africa. This new
slavery or "forced" labor was stoutly defended as a necessary foundation
for implanting modern industry in a barbarous land; but its likeness to
slavery was too clear and it has been modified, but not wholly abolished.

The _third_ attempted solution of the Negro sought the result of the
_second_ by less direct methods. Negroes in Africa, the West Indies, and
America were to be forced to work by land monopoly, taxation, and little
or no education. In this way a docile industrial class working for low
wages, and not intelligent enough to unite in labor unions, was to be
developed. The peonage systems in parts of the United States and the labor
systems of many of the African colonies of Great Britain and Germany
illustrate this phase of solution.[111] It is also illustrated in many of
the West Indian islands where we have a predominant Negro population, and
this population freed from slavery and partially enfranchised. Land and
capital, however, have for the most part been so managed and monopolized
that the black peasantry have been reduced to straits to earn a living in
one of the richest parts of the world. The problem is now going to be
intensified when the world's commerce begins to sweep through the Panama
Canal.

All these solutions and methods, however, run directly counter to modern
philanthropy, and have to be carried on with a certain concealment and
half-hypocrisy which is not only distasteful in itself, but always liable
to be discovered and exposed by some liberal or religious movement of the
masses of men and suddenly overthrown. These solutions are, therefore,
gradually merging into a _fourth_ solution, which is to-day very popular.
This solution says: Negroes differ from whites in their inherent genius
and stage of development. Their development must not, therefore, be sought
along European lines, but along their own native lines. Consequently the
effort is made to-day in British Nigeria, in the French Congo and Sudan,
in Uganda and Rhodesia to leave so far as possible the outward structure
of native life intact; the king or chief reigns, the popular assemblies
meet and act, the native courts adjudicate, and native social and family
life and religion prevail. All this, however, is subject to the veto and
command of a European magistracy supported by a native army with European
officers. The advantage of this method is that on its face it carries no
clue to its real working. Indeed it can always point to certain undoubted
advantages: the abolition of the slave trade, the suppression of war and
feud, the encouragement of peaceful industry. On the other hand, back of
practically all these experiments stands the economic motive--the
determination to use the organization, the land, and the people, not for
their own benefit, but for the benefit of white Europe. For this reason
education is seldom encouraged, modern religious ideas are carefully
limited, sound political development is sternly frowned upon, and industry
is degraded and changed to the demands of European markets. The most
ruthless class of white mercantile exploiters is allowed large liberty, if
not a free hand, and protected by a concerted attempt to deify white men
as such in the eyes of the native and in their own imagination.[112]

White missionary societies are spending perhaps as much as five million
dollars a year in Africa and accomplishing much good, but at the same time
white merchants are sending at least twenty million dollars' worth of
European liquor into Africa each year, and the debauchery of the almost
unrestricted rum traffic goes far to neutralize missionary effort.

[Illustration: Distribution of Negro Blood, Ancient and Modern]

Under this last mentioned solution of the Negro problems we may put the
attempts at the segregation of Negroes and mulattoes in the United States
and to some extent in the West Indies. Ostensibly this is "separation" of
the races in society, civil rights, etc. In practice it is the
subordination of colored people of all grades under white tutelage, and
their separation as far as possible from contact with civilization in
dwelling place, in education, and in public life.

On the other hand the economic significance of the Negro to-day is
tremendous. Black Africa to-day exports annually nearly two hundred
million dollars' worth of goods, and its economic development has scarcely
begun. The black West Indies export nearly one hundred million dollars'
worth of goods; to this must be added the labor value of Negroes in South
Africa, Egypt, the West Indies, North, Central, and South America, where
the result is blended in the common output of many races. The economic
foundation of the Negro problem can easily be seen to be a matter of many
hundreds of millions to-day, and ready to rise to the billions tomorrow.

Such figures and facts give some slight idea of the economic meaning of
the Negro to-day as a worker and industrial factor. "Tropical Africa and
its peoples are being brought more irrevocably every year into the vortex
of the economic influences that sway the western world."[113]

What do Negroes themselves think of these their problems and the attitude
of the world toward them? First and most significant, they are thinking.
There is as yet no great single centralizing of thought or unification of
opinion, but there are centers which are growing larger and larger and
touching edges. The most significant centers of this new thinking are,
perhaps naturally, outside Africa and in America: in the United States and
in the West Indies; this is followed by South Africa and West Africa and
then, more vaguely, by South America, with faint beginnings in East
Central Africa, Nigeria, and the Sudan.

The Pan-African movement when it comes will not, however, be merely a
narrow racial propaganda. Already the more far-seeing Negroes sense the
coming unities: a unity of the working classes everywhere, a unity of the
colored races, a new unity of men. The proposed economic solution of the
Negro problem in Africa and America has turned the thoughts of Negroes
toward a realization of the fact that the modern white laborer of Europe
and America has the key to the serfdom of black folk, in his support of
militarism and colonial expansion. He is beginning to say to these
workingmen that, so long as black laborers are slaves, white laborers
cannot be free. Already there are signs in South Africa and the United
States of the beginning of understanding between the two classes.

In a conscious sense of unity among colored races there is to-day only a
growing interest. There is slowly arising not only a curiously strong
brotherhood of Negro blood throughout the world, but the common cause of
the darker races against the intolerable assumptions and insults of
Europeans has already found expression. Most men in this world are
colored. A belief in humanity means a belief in colored men. The future
world will, in all reasonable probability, be what colored men make it. In
order for this colored world to come into its heritage, must the earth
again be drenched in the blood of fighting, snarling human beasts, or will
Reason and Good Will prevail? That such may be true, the character of the
Negro race is the best and greatest hope; for in its normal condition it
is at once the strongest and gentlest of the races of men: "Semper novi
quid ex Africa!"

FOOTNOTES:

[110] Sir Harry Johnston estimates 135,000,000 Negroes, of whom 24,591,000
live in America. See _Inter-Racial Problems_, p. 335.

[111] The South African natives, in an appeal to the English Parliament,
show in an astonishing way the confiscation of their land by the English.
They say that in the Union of South Africa 1,250,000 whites own
264,000,000 acres of land, while the 4,500,000 natives have only
21,000,000 acres. On top of this the Union Parliament has passed a law
making even the future purchase of land by Negroes illegal save in
restricted areas!

[112] The traveler Glave writes in the _Century Magazine_ (LIII, 913):
"Formerly [in the Congo Free State] an ordinary white man was merely
called 'bwana' or 'Mzunga'; now the merest insect of a pale face earns the
title of 'bwana Mkubwa' [big master]."

[113] E.D. Morel, in the _Nineteenth Century_.




SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING


There is no general history of the Negro race. Perhaps Sir Harry H.
Johnston, in his various works on Africa, has come as near covering the
subject as any one writer, but his valuable books have puzzling
inconsistencies and inaccuracies. Keane's _Africa_ is a helpful
compendium, despite the fact that whenever Keane discovers intelligence in
an African he immediately discovers that its possessor is no "Negro." The
articles in the latest edition of the _EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica_ are of
some value, except the ridiculous article on the "Negro" by T.A. Joyce.
Frobenius' newly published _Voice of Africa_ is broad-minded and
informing, and Brown's _Story of Africa and its Explorers_ brings together
much material in readable form. The compendiums by Keltie and White, and
Johnston's _Opening up of Africa_ are the best among the shorter
treatises.

None of these authors write from the point of view of the Negro as a man,
or with anything but incidental acknowledgment of the existence or value
of his history. We may, however, set down certain books under the various
subjects which the chapters have treated. These books will consist of (1)
standard works for wider reading and (2) special works on which the author
has relied for his statements or which amplify his point of view. _The
latter are starred_.


THE PHYSIOGRAPHY OF AFRICA

A.S. White: _The Development of Africa_, 2d ed., 1892.

Stanford's Compendium of Geography: _Africa_, by A.H. Keane, 2d ed.,
1904-7.

E. Reclus: _Universal Geography_, Vols. X-XIII.


RACIAL DIFFERENCES AND THE ORIGIN AND CHARACTERISTICS OF NEGROES

J. Deniker: _The Races of Man_, etc., New York, 1904.

*J. Finot: _Race Prejudice_ (tr. by Wade-Evans), New York, 1907.

*W.Z. Ripley: _The Races of Europe_, etc., New York, 1899.

*Jacques Loeb: in _The Crisis_, Vol. VIII, p. 84, Vol. IX, p. 92.

*_Papers on Inter-Racial Problems Communicated to the First Universal
Races Congress_, etc. (ed. by G. Spiller), 1911.

*G. Sergi: _The Mediterranean Race_, etc., London, 1901.

*Franz Boas: _The Mind of Primitive Man_, New York, 1911.

C.B. Davenport: _Heredity of Skin Color in Negro-White Crosses_, 1913.


EARLY MOVEMENTS OF THE NEGRO RACE

*Sir Harry H. Johnston: _The Opening up of Africa_ (Home University
Library).

---- _A History of the Colonization of Africa by Alien Races_, Cambridge,
1905.

*G.W. Stowe: _The Native Races of South Africa_ (ed. by G.M. Theal),
London, 1910.

(Consult also Johnston's other works on Africa, and his article in Vol.
XLIII of the _Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great
Britain and Ireland_; also _Inter-Racial Problems, and_ Deniker, noted
above.)


NEGRO IN ETHIOPIA AND EGYPT

(The works of Breasted and Petrie, Maspero, Budge and Newberry and
Garstang are the standard books on Egypt. They mention the Negro, but
incidentally and often slightingly.)

*A.F. Chamberlain: "The Contribution of the Negro to Human Civilization"
(_Journal of Race Development_, Vol. I, April, 1911).

T.E.S. Scholes: _Glimpses of the Ages_, etc., London, 1905.

W.H. Ferris: _The African Abroad_, etc., 2 vols., New Haven, 1913.

E.A.W. Budge: _The Egyptian Sudan_, 2 vols., 1907.

*_Archeological Survey of Nubia_.

*A. Thompson and D. Randal McIver: _The Ancient Races of the Thebaid_,
1905.


ABYSSINIA

Job Ludolphus: _A New History of Ethiopia_ (tr. by Gent), London, 1682.

W.S. Harris: _Highlands of Ãthiopia_, 3 vols., London, 1844.

R.S. Whiteway: _The Portuguese Expedition to Abyssinia_ ... as narrated by
Castanhosa, etc., 1902.


THE NIGER RIVER AND ISLAM *F.L. Shaw (Lady Lugard): _A Tropical
Dependency_, etc., London, 1906.

(The reader may dismiss as worthless Lady Lugard's definition of "Negro."
Otherwise her book is excellent.)

*Es-Sa'di, Abderrahman Ben Abdallah, etc., translated into French by O.
Houdas, Paris, 1900.

*F. DuBois: _Timbuktu the Mysterious_ (tr. by White), 1896.

*W.D. Cooley: _The Negroland of the Arabs_, etc., 1841.

*H. Barth: _Travels and Discoveries in North and Central Africa_, etc., 5
vols., 1857-58.

*Ibn Batuta: _Travels_, etc. (tr. by Lee), 1829.

*Leo Africanus: _The History and Description of Africa_, etc. (tr. by
Pory, ed. by R. Brown), 3 vols., 1896.

*E.W. Blyden: _Christianity, Islam, and the Negro Race_.

*Leo Frobenius: _The Voice of Africa_ (tr. by Blind), 2 vols., 1913.

Mungo Park: _Travels in the Interior Districts of Africa_, 1799.


THE NEGRO ON THE GUINEA COAST

*Leo Frobenius (as above).

Sir Harry H. Johnston: _Liberia_, 2 vols., New York, 1906.

H.H. Foote: _Africa and the American Flag_, New York, 1859.

T.H.T. McPherson: _A History of Liberia_, Baltimore, Johns Hopkins
Studies.

T.J. Alldridge: _A Transformed Colony_ (Sierra Leone), London, 1910.

E.D. Morel: _Affairs of West Africa_, 1902.

H.L. Roth: _Great Benin and Its Customs_, 1903.

*F. Starr: _Liberia_, 1913.

W. Jay: _An Inquiry_, etc., 1835.

*A.B. Ellis: _The Tshi-speaking Peoples of the Gold Coast_, 1887.

---- _The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast_, 1890.

---- _The Yoruba-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast_, 1894.

C.H. Read and O.M. Dalton: _Antiquities from the City of Benin_, etc.,
1899.

*M.H. Kingsley: _West African Studies_, 2d. ed., 1904.

*G.W. Ellis: _Negro Culture in West Africa_ (Vai-speaking peoples), 1914.



THE CONGO VALLEY

*G. Schweinfurth: _The Heart of Africa_, Vol. II, 1873.

*H.M. Stanley: _Through the Dark Continent_, 2 vols., 1878.

---- _In Darkest Africa_, 2 vols., 1890.

---- _The Congo_, etc., 2 vols., London, 1885.

H. von Wissman: _My Second Journey through Equatorial Africa_, 1891.

*H.R. Fox-Bourne: _Civilization in Congoland_, 1903.

Sir Harry H. Johnston: _George Grenfell and the Congo_, 2 vols., London,
1908.

*E.D. Morel: _Red Rubber_, London, 1906.


THE NEGRO IN THE REGION OF THE GREAT LAKES

*Sir Harry H. Johnston: _The Uganda Protectorate_, 2d ed., 2 vols., 1904.

---- _British Central Africa_, 1897.

---- _The Nile Quest_, 1903.

*D. Randal McIver: _MediÃ¦val Rhodesia_, 1906.

*_The Last Journals of David Livingstone in Central Africa_ (ed. by H.
Waller), 1874.

J. Dos Santos: _Ethiopia Oriental_ (Theal's _Records of South Africa_,
Vol. VII).

C. Peters: "Ophir and Punt in South Africa" (_African Society Journal_,
Vol. I).

De Barros: _De Asia_.

R. Burton: _Lake Regions of Central Africa_, 1860.

R.P. Ashe: _Chronicles of Uganda_, 1894.

(See also Stanley's works, as above.)


THE NEGRO IN SOUTH AFRICA

*G.M. Theal: _History and Ethnography of South Africa of the Zambesi to
1795_, 3 vols., 1907-10.

---- _History of South Africa since September, 1795_, 5 vols., 1908.

---- _Records of South Eastern Africa_, 9 vols., 1898-1903.

*J. Bryce: _Impressions of South Africa_, 1897.

D. Livingstone: _Missionary Travels in South Africa_, 1857.

*South African Native Affairs Commission, 1903-5, _Reports_, etc., 5
vols., Cape Town, 1904-5.

G. Lagden: _The Basutos_, London, 1909.

J. Stewart: _Lovedale_, 1884.

(See also Stowe, as above.)


ON NEGRO CIVILIZATION

J. Dowd: _The Negro Races_, 1907, 1914.

*H. Gregoire: _An Inquiry concerning the Intellectual and Moral Faculties
and Literature of Negroes_, etc. (tr. by Warden), Brooklyn, 1810.

C. BÃ¼cher: _Industrial Evolution_ (tr. by Wickett), New York, 1904.

*Franz Boas: "The Real Race Problem" (_The Crisis_, December, 1910).

---- _Commencement Address_ (Atlanta University Leaflet, No. 19).

*F. Ratzel: _The History of Mankind_ (tr. by Butler), 3 vols., 1904.

C. Hayford: _Gold Coast Institutions_, 1903.

A.B. Camphor: _Missionary Sketches and Folk Lore from Africa_, 1909.

R.H. Nassau: _Fetishism in West Africa_, 1907.

*William Schneider: _Die CulturfÃ¤higkeit des Negers_, Frankfort, 1885.

*G. Schweinfurth: _Artes Africanae_, etc., 1875.

Duke of Mecklenburg: _From the Congo to the Niger and the Nile_ (English
tr.), Philadelphia, 1914.

D. Crawford: _Thinking Black_.

R.N. Cust: _Sketch of Modern Language of Africa_, 2 vols., 1883.

H. Chatelain: _The Folk Lore of Angola_.

D. Kidd: _The Essential Kaffir_, 1904.

---- _Savage Childhood_, 1906.

---- _Kaffir Socialism and the Dawn of Individualism_, 1908.

M.H. Tongue: _Bushman Paintings_, Oxford, 1909.

(See also the works of A.B. Ellis, Miss Kingsley, Sir Harry H. Johnston,
Frobenius, Stowe, Theal, and Ibn Batuta; and particularly Chamberlain's
article in the _Journal of Race Development_.)


THE SLAVE TRADE

T.K. Ingram: _History of Slavery and Serfdom_, London, 1895. (Same article
revised in EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica, 11th edition.)

John R. Spears: The American Slave Trade, 1900.

*T.F. Buxton: _The African Slave Trade and Its Remedy_, etc., 1896.

T. Clarkson: _History ... of the Abolition of the African Slave Trade_,
etc., 2 vols., 1808.

R. Drake: _Revelations of a Slave Smuggler_, New York, 1860.

*_Report of the Lords of the Committee of Council_, etc., London, 1789.

*B. Mayer: _Captain Canot or Twenty Years of an African Slaver_, etc.,
1854.

W.E.B. DuBois: _The suppression of the African Slave-Trade to the U.S.A._,
1896.

(See also Bryan Edwards' _West Indies_.)


THE WEST INDIES AND SOUTH AMERICA

Fletcher and Kidder: _Brazil and the Brazilians_, 1879.

*Bryan Edwards: _History ... of the British West Indies_, 5 editions,
Vols. II-V, 1793-1819.

*Sir Harry H. Johnston: _The Negro in the New World_, 1910.

T.G. Steward: _The Haitian Revolution_, 1791-1804, 1914.

J.N. Leger: _Haiti_, etc., 1907.

J. Bryce: _South America_, etc., 1912.

*J.B. de Lacerda: "The Metis or Half-Breeds of Brazil" (_Inter-Racial
Problems_, etc.)

A.K. Fiske: _History of the West Indies_, 1899.


THE NEGRO IN THE UNITED STATES

*_Walker's Appeal_, 1829.

*G.W. Williams: _History of the Negro Race in America_, 1619-1880, 1882.

B.G. Brawley: _A Short History of the American Negro_, 1913.

B.T. Washington: _Up from Slavery_, 1901.

---- _The Story of the Negro_, 2 vols., 1909.

*_The Autobiography of an Ex-Colored Man_, 1912.

*G.E. Stroud: _Sketch of the Laws relating to Slavery_, etc., 1827.

_The Human Way_: Addresses on Race Problems at the Southern Sociological
Congress, Atlanta, 1913 (ed. by J.E. McCulloch).

W.J. Simmons: _Men of Mark_, 1887.

*J.R. Giddings: _The Exiles of Florida_, 1858.

W.E. Nell: _The Colored Patriots of the American Revolution_, etc., 1855.

C.W. Chesnutt: _The Marrow of Tradition_, 1901.

P.L. Dunbar: _Lyrics of Lowly Life_, 1896.

*_Life and Times of Frederick Douglass_, revised edition, 1892.

*H.E. Kreihbel: _Afro-American Folk Songs_, etc., 1914.

T.P. Fenner and others: _Cabin and Plantation Songs_, 3d ed., 1901.

W.F. Allen and others: _Slave Songs of the United States_, 1867.

W.E.B. DuBois: "The Negro Race in the United States of America"
(_Inter-Racial Problems_, etc.).

---- "The Economics of Negro Emancipation" (_Sociological Review_,
October, 1911).

---- _John Brown_.

---- _The Philadelphia Negro_, 1899.

W.E.B. DuBois: "Reconstruction and its Benefits" (_American Historical
Review_, Vol. XV, No. 4).

---- _editor_, The Crisis: A Record of the Darker Races, monthly, 1910.

---- _editor_, The Atlanta University Studies:
  No. 1. _Mortality Among Negroes in Cities_, 1896.
  No. 2. _Social and Physical Conditions of Negroes in Cities_, 1897.
  No. 3. _Some Efforts of Negroes for Social Betterment_, 1898.
  No. 4. _The Negro in Business_, 1899.
  No. 5. _The College Bred Negro_, 1900.
  No. 6. _The Negro Common School_, 1901.
  No. 7. _The Negro Artisan_, 1902.
  No. 8. _The Negro Church_, 1903.
  No. 9. _Notes on Negro Crime_, 1904.
  No. 10. _A Select Bibliography of the Negro American_, 1905.
  No. 11. _Health and Physique of the Negro American_, 1906.
  No. 12. _Economic Co-operation among Negro Americans_, 1907.
  No. 13. _The Negro American Family_, 1908.
  No. 14. _Efforts for Social Betterment among Negro Americans_, 1909.
  No. 15. _The College Bred Negro American_, 1910.
  No. 16. _The Common School and the Negro American_, 1911.
  No. 17. _The Negro American Artisan_, 1912.
  No. 18. _Morals and Manners among Negro Americans_, 1913.

*G.W. Cable: _The Silent South_, etc., 1885.

*J.R. Lynch: _The Facts of Reconstruction_, 1913.

*J.T. Wilson: _The Black Phalanx_, 1897.

William Goodell: _Slavery and Anti-Slavery_, 1852.

G.S. Merriam: _The Negro and the Nation_, 1906.

A.B. Hart: _The Southern South_, 1910.

*G. Livermore: _An Historical Research respecting the Opinions of the
Founders of the Republic on Negroes_, etc., 1862.

Hartshorn and Penniman: _An Era of Progress and Promise_, 1910 (profusely
illustrated).

*James Brewster: _Sketches of Southern Mystery, Treason, and Murder_.

Willcox and DuBois: _Negroes in the United States_ (United States Census
of 1900, Bulletin No. 8).


THE FUTURE OF THE NEGRO RACE

*J.S. Keltie: _The Partition of Africa_, 2d ed., 1895.

B.T. Washington: _The Future of the Negro_.

W.E.B. DuBois: "The Future of the Negro Race in America" (_East and West_,
Vol. II, No. 5).

---- _Souls of Black Folk_, 1913.

---- _Quest of the Silver Fleece_.

Alexander Crummell: _The Future of Africa_, 2d ed., 1862.

*Casely Hayford: _Ethiopia Unbound_, 1911.

Kelly Miller: _Out of the House of Bondage_, 1914.

---- _Race Adjustment_, 1908.

*J. Royce: _Race Questions_, etc., 1908.

*R.S. Baker: _Following the Color Line_, 1908.

N.S. Shaler: _The Neighbor_.

E.D. Morel: "Free Labor in Tropical Africa" (_Nineteenth Century and
After_, 1914).

(See also Finot, Boas, _Inter-Racial Problems_, and White's _Development
of Africa_.)


